Degenerative change in the spine
The vertebral body-disc articulations are cartilaginous joints. Vertebral body endplates
are covered by hyaline cartilage that is analogous to articular cartilage in other joints.
The intervertebral disc-endplate complex is composed of three components: The annulus
fibrosus and nucleus pulposus (which together make up the disc), and the cartilaginous
endplates.
Osteoarthritis affects synovial joints. Therefore, osteoarthritis in the spine can occur at the
facet zygapophyseal), atlantoaxial, uncovertebral joints (in the cervical spine at C3-C7),
costovertebral, and sacroiliac joints. Osteoarthritis does not involve the disc-endplates.
The spectrum of intervertebral disc and endplate degeneration is characterized by
dessication and eventual collapse of the intervertebral discs, endplate sclerosis and
remodeling, and osteophyte formation. This process is best thought of as a chronic response
to injury, rather than an acquired disease, and the term discovertebral degeneration is more
accurate than the informal phrase degenerative disc disease. Detailed MR-based discussion
of degenerative spine can be found in the "Spine" chapter.
Gas in the intervertebral disc, also called vacuum phenomenon, is commonly seen and is
pathognomonic for degenerative change.
Iti is important not to confuse vacuum phenomenon (gas in intervertebral disc) with Kummell disease,
which is gas in a vertebral body compression fracture representing osteonecrosis.
Vacuum phenomenon in disc degeneration.
Kummell disease: Gas in vertebral body compression
fracture.
Two patients demonstrating vacuum phenomenon versus Kummell disease.
Sagittal CT of the lumbar spine (left image) shows multilevel disc degeneration with intervertebral disc
space narrowing and vacuum phenomena (yellow arrows).
Sagittal CT of the lumbar spine in a different patient (right image) shows gas within the L1 vertebral body
compression fracture (red arrow), indicative of osteonecross/vertebral body collapse (Kummell disease).
Complications of discovertebral degeneration include spinal stenosis, neural foraminal
stenosis, and degenerative spondylolisthesis.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a distinct entity from degenerative disc
disease, but appears similar due to exuberant osteophytosis. DISH is defined as flowing
bridging anterior osteophytes spanning at least 4 vertebral levels, with normal disc spaces
and sacroiliac joints. The etiology of DISH is unknown. It is usually asymptomatic but may be
a cause of dysphagia when it affects the cervical spine. DISH occurs in elderly patients.
DISH is associated with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL), which may be a cause
of spinal stenosis. OPLL may be difficult to identify on MRI and is best seen on CT.
MSK: 913