Varicocele embolization
TRANS MIDLINE TESTICLE
Left varicocele: Ultrasound: shows dilated pampiniform
veins in the left scrotum (arrow). DSA (middle image)
shows the left gonadal vein with dilated vessels (arrow).
Coil embolization (arrow, right image) of the internal iliac
vein was performed.
A varicocele is a collection of varicose veins in the pampiniform plexus. Primary varicocele
(most common) is due to absent or incompetent valves in the proximal gonadal vein causing
reflux. Secondary varicocele is due to a mass obstructing venous return.
Varicoceles are usually seen on the left side due to the acute angle of insertion on the renal
vein, predisposing it to reflux, but can be bilateral. However, an isolated right varicocele
should prompt workup for an obstructing retroperitoneal mass.
Diagnosis by scrotal ultrasound shows a dilated (>2 mm) venous plexus with a bag of worms
appearance, which worsens on Valsalva maneuver.
Indications for treatment are pain, infertility, or testicular atrophy.
Treatment is coil embolization or surgical ligation of the gonadal vein, which have been
shown to be equivalent in outcome.
Right femoral vein or right internal jugular vein access is preferred for a left-sided varicocele;
internal jugular vein or basilic vein access is preferred for a right-sided varicocele.
Lower extremity venous insufficiency
Lower extremity venous insufficiency most commonly results from venous hypertension
secondary to incompetent valves but can also be seen following prior DVT.
Various treatment options are available, including thermal endovascular ablation with
either laser or radiofrequency, or non-thermal ablation by injection of sclerosing agents into
the vessels. Thermal and non-thermal interventions work by damaging the endothelium,
causing the vessels to fibrose and resulting in irreversible occlusion.
Thermal ablation procedures require tumescent anesthesia, which is injection of a mixture
of lidocaine, saline, and epinephrine into the subcutaneous tissue surrounding the treated
vessel. The injection acts as a local anesthetic, but also as a heat sink, protecting the
overlying skin by preventing skin burns.
Commonly treated vessels are the great saphenous vein (GSV), small saphenous vein (SSV),
anterior accessory great saphenous vein (AAGSV), and their tributaries.
Sclerotherapy is the injection of a chemical irritant into the vessel, usually for small or
superficial venous disease, but can also be used for perforators or deep veins, and results in
ablation of the vessel(s).
Post-procedure management includes compression stockings for all of the above options.
IR: 626