Neural foraminal stenosis
Neural Foraminal Stenosis
Mild Neural Foraminal Stenosis
Moderate Stenosis
Severe Stenosis
A.
B.
C.
Nerver rooti isi in contactt the walls of the neural forameni in .Contacty with the nerve root on
Completec effacement of epidural
two planes, eitheri in anterior-posterior dimension (A) or
atl least three: sides, and:
fat or compression ofc oft the nerve
cranial-caudal dimension (B); ori in 3 planes (C)
Partial effacement of epidural fat
root
-Asidef from mildi narrowing oft thet foramen and contact
throughout the foramen.
with the exiting nerve root, the epidural fati is otherwise
maintained
Mild foraminal stenosis: There is
Moderate foraminal stenosis: There Severe foraminal stenosis:
contact of the exiting nerve root on is contact of the exiting nerve root Complete effacement of epidural
two sides (yellow arrows).
on three sides (yellow arrows) with fat (at two different levels; yellow
partial effacement of epidural fat. arrows).
Note the normal neural foramen at
the level above (red arrows).
Varying degrees of neural foraminal stenosis in three different patients on sagittal T1-weighted MR.
The neural foramina are paired openings at each intervertebral spinal level through which
the spinal nerve roots pass. They are located at the lateral aspects of the vertebral canal,
and are bounded by the intervertebral disc-endplate complexes anteriorly, the articular
processes and facet joints posteriorly, and the pedicles inferiorly and superiorly. Thus,
a combination of discovertebral degeneration and facet arthropathy (and the overlying
ligamentum flavum) may contribute to neural foraminal stenosis.
Normally, the exiting nerve should be completely surrounded by epidural fat with a keyhole
morphology. Note that if there is simply some effacement of epidural fat at the inferior
margin of the keyhole but the nerve remains surrounded by epidural that is still normal.
Mild neural foraminal stenosis is contact of the nerve root on two or three sides with
otherwise preserved epidural fat and no neural compression.
Moderate neural foraminal stenosis is contact of the nerve root by three or four sides with
partial effacement of epidural fat.
Severe neural foraminal stenosis is complete effacement of epidural fat or compression of
the nerve root.
The neural foramina are best assessed on the sagittal T1-weighted images.
Spine: 887