PATTERNS OF ENHANCEMENT IN THE BRAIN
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) and enhancement
Micro or macro disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) produces parenchymal
enhancement after contrast administration, which may be secondary to infection,
inflammation, neoplasm, trauma, and vascular etiologies.
The BBB is formed by astrocytic foot processes of brain capillary endothelial cells and
prevents direct communication between the systemic capillaries and the protected
extracellular fluid of the brain.
Several CNS regions do not have a BBB, and therefore normally enhance:
Choroid plexus.
Pituitary and pineal glands.
Tuber cinereum (controls circadian rhythm, located in the inferior hypothalamus).
Area postrema (controls vomiting, located at inferior aspect of fourth ventricle).
The dura also lacks a BBB, but does not normally enhance. This phenomenon is subsequently explained in
the section on pachymeningeal (dural) enhancement.
Vascular enhancement is due to a localized increase in blood flow, which may be secondary
to vasodilation, hyperemia, neovascularity, or arteriovenous shunting.
On CT, the arterial phase of contrast enhancement (i.e., CT angiogram) mostly shows intravascular
enhancement. Parenchymal enhancement, including the dural folds of the falx and tentorium, is best seen
several minutes after the initial contrast bolus.
On MRI, routine contrast-enhanced sequences are obtained in the parenchymal phase, several minutes
after injection. Most intracranial vascular MRI imaging is performed with a noncontrast time-of-flight
technique.
Intracranial enhancement may be intra- or extra-axial. Extra-axial structures that may
enhance in pathologic conditions include the dura pachymeninges) and arachnoid
leptomeninges).
Periventricular enhancement (intra-axial)
Axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI
demonstrates smooth periventricular
enhancement (arrows) thought to represent
ventricuits/nfectious ependymitis. This
was proven to be an uncommon case of
metastatic melanoma based on CSF sampling.
Enhancement of the subependymal cortical surface can be either neoplastic, infectious,
demyelination, and treatment-induced (e.g., radiation).
Nodular subcortical enhancement intra-axial)
Nodular intra-axial enhancement is most commonly due to metastatic disease.
Hematogenously disseminated metastatic disease is commonly found at the subcortical
gray-white junctions. Tumor emboli become "stuck" at the junction between the simple
vasculature of the white matter and the highly branching vasculature of the gray matter.
Neuro Brain: 661