Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis
Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis is a rare disease where lipid-laden macrophages are
deposited in soft-tissues and periarticular tendons, forming skin nodules and erosions with
sclerotic margins.
The well-defined erosions of multicentric reticulohistiocytosis tend to affect the DIPs
symmetrically. Other radiographic findings of multicentric reticulohistiocytosis include soft-
tissue nodules and preserved bone density.
Joint destruction may be rapid and progressive, producing an arthritis mutilans appearance.
Hemophilic arthropathy
Hemophilic arthropathy: Lateral
elbow radiograph shows severe
joint space narrowing. Increased
soft-tissue density surrounding
the joint (arrow) is due to synovial
hemosiderin deposition.
In this case, the size of the
radial head is not enlarged, but
classically hemophilia features an
enlarged radial head.
Hemophilia is an X-linked inherited disorder of either factor VIII (hemophilia A) or IX
(hemophilia B; Christmas disease) deficiency causing recurrent bleeding.
Hemophilia most often affects the knees, elbows, and ankles. Recurrent hemarthrosis
results in synovial hypertrophy and hyperemia. The hyperemia may cause epiphyseal
enlargement and early fusion.
Characteristic appearance of the elbow is an enlarged radial head and widened trochlear notch.
Characteristic appearance of the knee is squaring of the patella and widened intercondylar notch.
Secondary arthritis may lead to marked joint space narrowing.
Deposition of iron in the synovium causes increased soft-tissue density around joints.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (discussed below) also causes articular hyperemia and may
have similar radiographic findings, especially in the knee (widened intercondylar notch) and
elbow (enlarged radial head).
Pseudotumor of hemophilia is a benign lesion caused by recurrent intraosseous or
subperiosteal bleeding. The chronic cyclical bleeding leads to bony scalloping and pressure
erosion, often with an associated soft-tissue mass.
On radiography, pseudotumor is benign-appearing, with well-circumscribed and sclerotic margins.
Pseudotumor may have a complex MRI appearance due to different stages of blood products.
MSK: 931