THORACIC AORTA
THORACIC AORTIC ANEURYSM
Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA)
472
6.
Thoracic aortic aneurysm: Frontal chest radiograph (left image) demonstrates ectasia of the right aortic border
(arrows). Gated contrast-enhanced CT (right image) with a double-oblique short-axis reformation demonstrates
an ascending aortic diameter of 4.7 cm, representing an aneurysm.
A thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) is defined as an ascending aortic diameter >4 cm or
a descending thoracic aorta >3.5 cm in diameter. Aortic size may also be normalized to
body surface area and compared to reference values. Based on Framingham Heart Study
participants, ascending aorta >5 cm and descending aorta >4 cm are considered 150% or
two standard deviations of normal, and thus aneurysmal.
Double-oblique short-axis multiplanar reformatted images perpendicular to the aortic lumen
(i.e., true short-axis) should always be used to measure aortic diameter.
Most thoracic aortic aneurysms are caused by atherosclerosis, with the descending thoracic
aorta affected more commonly. Almost 1/3 of patients with atherosclerotic TAA will have an
associated abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Non-atherosclerotic causes of TAA include connective tissue disorders (such as Marfan and
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes), bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) associated aortopathy, vasculitis
(including Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and relapsing
polychondritis), cystic medial necrosis, and infectious aortitis.
Annuloaortic ectasia represents dilated sinuses of Valsalva and ascending aorta with
effacement of the sinotubular junction, resulting in a tulip bulb-shaped aorta. Annuloaortic
ectasia is associated with Marfan, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, homocystinuria, and
osteogenesis imperfecta.
Surgical treatment is recommended for an ascending TAA >5.5 cm in diameter and a
descending TAA >6 cm in diameter. However, patients with connective tissue disorders and
BAV aortopathy (meeting criteria for valve replacement) have a lower surgical threshold of
4.5 cm. Beyond simple size criteria, annual growth rate >1 cm/year (or >5 mm/6 months) is
an indication for surgical repair.
Complications of TAA endoscopic and open repair include rupture, dissection, infection,
endoleak, and paraplegia (caused by artery of Adamkiewicz occlusion).
Vascular: 549