Lines, stripes, and interfaces (continued)
The right and left paratracheal stripes are formed by two layers of pleura where the medial
aspect of each lung abuts the lateral wall of the trachea and intervening mediastinal fat.
The right paratracheal stripe is the most commonly seen of these landmarks, seen in up to 97% of normal
PA chest radiographs.
Thickening of the right paratracheal stripe is most commonly due to a paratracheal mass (including
adenopathy or thyroid or tracheal neoplasm).
Thickening of the left paratracheal stripe has a similar differential. Note that the normal left subclavian
reflection is a less dense stripe on the left of the trachea.
Mediastinal hematoma should be considered in the setting of trauma.
The posterior tracheal stripe or tracheoesophageal stripe is the only interface seen on the
lateral radiograph, representing the interface of the posterior wall of the trachea with the
two pleural layers of the medial right lung.
The right and left paraspinal lines are actually interfaces but appear as lines due to Mach
effect and are formed by two layers of pleura abutting the posterior chest wall.
In contrast to the posterior junction line, the paraspinal lines are located inferiorly in the thorax, typically
from the eighth through twelfth ribs.
A paraspinal line abnormality suggests a paravertebral mediastinal mass, including hematoma, neurogenic
tumor, aortic aneurysm, extramedullary hematopoiesis, esophageal mass, and osteophyte.
The azygoesophageal recess is an interface formed by the contact of the posteromedial
right lower lobe and the retrocardiac mediastinum.
The azygoesophageal. recess extends from the subcarinal region to the diaphragm inferiorly.
Distortion of the azygoesophageal recess may be due to esophageal mass, hiatal hernia, left atrial
enlargement, and adenopathy.
Aortopulmomary (AP) window
The aortopulmonary (AP) window is a mediastinal space nestled underneath the aortic arch
(which forms the superior, anterior, and posterior boundaries) and the top of the pulmonary
artery. The medial border of the AP window is formed by the esophagus, trachea, and left
mainstem bronchus.
On a normal frontal radiograph, the AP window is a shallow concave contour below the
aortic knob and above the pulmonary artery.
Abnormal convexity (outwards bulging) of the AP window suggests a mass arising from or
involving structures that normally live within the AP window, including:
Lymph nodes: Adenopathy is the most common cause of an AP window abnormality.
Left phrenic nerve: Injury may cause paralysis of the left hemidiaphragm.
Recurrent laryngeal nerve: The AP window should be carefully evaluated in new-onset hoarseness,
especially if associated with diaphragmatic paralysis.
Left vagus nerve.
Ligamentum arteriosum.
Left bronchial arteries.
Aortic aneurysm or traumatic injury of the aorta.
Retrosternal clear space
The retrosternal clear space is a normal area of lucency posterior to the sternum seen on
the lateral radiograph. It correlates with the prevascular space on CT.
Obliteration of the retrosternal clear space suggests a prevascular mediastinal mass, right
ventricular dilation, or pulmonary artery enlargement.
Increase in the retrosternal clear space can be seen in emphysema.
Chest: 72