Leptomeningeal pia-arachnoid) enhancement (extra-axial)
Axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrates
Axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI shows
enhancement: along the cerebellar folia. This was
enhancement along the right cranial nerve VII
leptomeningeal spread of systemic lymphoma.
and' VIII complex (arrow). This was metastatic lung
adenocarcinoma.
The eptomeninges (lepto means thin or narrow) include the pia and arachnoid.
Leptomeningeal enhancement follows the undulating contours of the sulci as it includes
enhancement of both the subarachnoid space and the pial surface of the brain.
Meningitis (either bacterial, viral, or fungal) is the primary consideration when
leptomeningeal enhancement is seen.
Leptomeningeal enhancement in meningitis is caused by BBB breakdown due to inflammation or
infection.
Fine, linear enhancement suggests bacterial or viral meningitis.
Thicker, nodular enhancement suggests fungal meningitis.
Viral encephalitis may produce cranial nerve enhancement within the subarachnoid space.
Leptomeningeal metastases, also called neoplastic meningitis, is spread of tumor cells into
the subarachnoid space, which may be due to primary brain tumor or metastatic disease
from an extra-CNS malignancy.
CNS neoplasms that more commonly have leptomeningeal. spread include medulloblastoma, choroid
plexus tumor, lymphoma, ependymoma, glioblastoma, and germinoma.
Metastatic tumors known to cause leptomeningeal disease include lymphoma and breast cancer.
Inflammatory amyloidosis often shows leptomeningeal enhancement with cortical edema
and susceptibility.
The differential diagnosis of FLAIR hyperintensity in the subarachnoid space overlaps with the
differential for leptomeningeal enhancement. Subarachnoid FLAIR hyperintensity may be due to:
Meningitis and eptomeningeal metastases both have increased subarachnoid FLAIR signal and leptomeningeal
enhancement.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage manifests as increased subarachnoid FLAIR signal, without leptomeningeal
enhancement. Blooming artifact on GRE or SWI from blood products will help differentiate subarachnoid
hemorrhage from leptomeningeal metastases.
Slow vascular flow appears as an intravascular distribution of FLAIR hyperintensity due to "unmasking" of the
inherent high signal of blood, which remains in the plane of imaging as the entire pulse sequence is obtained. Slow
flow of peripheral vessels in moyamoya disease causes the ivy sign.
Subarachnoid FLAIR: signal is artifactually increased when the patient is on oxygen or propofol therapy, without
abnormal enhancement.
Neuro Brain: 665