PI-RADS (continued)
Assignment of a PI-RADS score (last updated 2019 v2.1) is based on MRI findings only. PSA
or clinical findings are not included. The likelihood of clinically significant cancer is reported
on a scale of 1-5, with a progressively increased likelihood with increasing score:
PI-RADS 1: Clinically significant canceri is highly unlikely (0%).
PI-RADS 2: Clinically significant cancer is unlikely (10%).
PI-RADS 3: Equivocal (16-20%).
PI-RADS 4: Clinically significant cancer is likely (21-86%).
PI-RADS 5: Clinically significant cancer is highly likely (93%).
PI-RADS assessment is based on T2-weighted images (T2WI), diffusion weighted images
(ADC/DWI), and dynamic contrast imaging (DCE). PI-RADS category assignment is weighted
to a specific sequence according to zonal anatomy.
Peripheral Zone (PZ)
Transitional Zone (TZ)
ADC
High b-value DWI
T2WI
Normal or
Normal
PI-RADS 1
completely
encapsulated
Linear or
PI-RADS2
Partially or non-
wedge-shaped
encapsulated
bMild to
Obscured margins,
moderate
PI-RADS 3
heterogeneous- 3Non-circumscribed,
Marked,
PI-RADS 4
homogeneous,
<1.5 cm
hypointense,
<1.5 cm
Marked,
PI-RADS 5
Same above but
21.5 cm
21.5 cm
> Any extraprostatic extension is PI-RADS 5
For transitional zone (TZ) lesions, T2WI should be used to assign a PI-RADS category, but it
is correlated to ADC/DWI. Transitional zone lesions are measured on T2WI.
For peripheral zone (PZ) lesions, ADC/DWI should be used to assign a PI-RADS category, but
it is correlated to T2WI. Peripheral zone lesions are measured on ADC images.
DCE can act as a "tie-breaker" for peripheral zone lesions when ADC/DWI characteristics
are equivocal for malignancy (a score of 3). An equivocal peripheral zone lesion should be
upgraded to PI-RADS 4 if DCE is positive.
If a transitional zone lesion has a T2WI score of 2 or 3, correlation with DWI imaging
characteristics is required. A high DWI score (see chart below) would upgrade the lesion.
For both PZ and TZI lesions, any extraprostatic extension makes the lesion PI-RADS 5. Evaluation
of the tumor margin should be performed in three planes. If the tumor is contiguous with the
prostatic capsule, it has a higher risk of extracapsular invasion. The neurovascular bundles
should be carefully examined where they abut the peripheral zone posterolaterally.
GU: 282