INTRODUCTION TO BREAST CANCER
Key facts and imaging modalities
Breast cancer is the most common female cancer in the United States. The average woman
has a one in eight chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer during her lifetime.
Mammography is the first-line tool for detection of breast cancer. The sensitivity of
screening mammography for detecting cancer has been estimated at between 68% and
90%. Diagnostic mammography has a higher sensitivity, up to 93%.
Digital breast tomosynthesis (DBT) is becoming the standard of care for breast cancer: screening and
diagnostic imaging. Compared to digital mammography, DBT decreases recall rate and increases cancer
detection rate.
Ultrasound is a critical adjunct to diagnostic mammography, and an important tool in
further evaluation of symptomatic patients when mammography is negative. Use of whole
breast ultrasound as a supplemental screening tool (in addition to mammography) is more
controversial; it can detect an additional 2-4 cancers per 1,000 women over mammography
alone, but at the cost of increased intervention.
Indications for breast ultrasound are characterization of palpable abnormalities, further characterization
of mammographic findings, first-line evaluation of al breast abnormality in a young (under age 30),
pregnant, or lactating woman, guidance for interventional procedures, and evaluation of breast implants.
As mentioned above, it is also used in some settings as supplemental screening in women with dense
breasts or those at high risk unable to undergo MRI surveillance.
MRI is the most sensitive imaging modality for breast cancer detection and is the most
definitive imaging modality in evaluation of implant integrity.
Indications for breast MRI include screening in high-risk patients (greater than 20% lifetime risk of
developing breast cancer), evaluation of extent of disease in a patient newly diagnosed with breast cancer,
evaluation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy response, assessment for residual disease after positive surgical
margins or for tumor recurrence after breast conserving treatment, evaluation for occult breast cancer in a
patient with axillary metastases and for assessment of breast implants.
Pathway of invasive ductal breast cancer progression
The current understanding of progression of ductal breast cancer is a multi-step
transformation from normal cells to flat epithelial atypia (FEA), to atypical ductal hyperplasia
(ADH), to ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC).
Normal
FEA
*
ADH
*
DCIS
*
IDC
Although controversial, it has been suggested that some steps in this pathway may be reversible.
FEA is a low-grade form of atypia involving the breast acini; it is seen in 3-5% of core needle
biopsies and usually presents as grouped amorphous or punctate calcifications.
ADH is a proliferation of intraductal luminal cells and represents a greater degree of atypia,
differing from DCIS only in extent or lack of certain architectural features. It is seen in 4-14%
of core biopsies and also typically presents as calcifications.
FEA and ADH are considered non-obligatory precursor lesions, meaning they sometimes,
but not always, progress to ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive ductal cancer. Both increase
a woman's risk for subsequent breast cancer, FEA, likely 3 times the general population and
ADH 4-5 times the general population
Upstaging (or upgrading) refers to the diagnosis of a higher grade malignant lesion (such as
DCIS or IDC) following surgical excision than initially diagnosed by core needle biopsy.
Breast: 369