ENDOMETRIAL CANCER
Endometrial carcinoma overview
Endometrial cancer: Grayscale ultrasound of the uterus (left image) shows a mildly echogenic, irregular
endometrial mass (arrows). Fluid in the endometrial canal has likely accumulated due to cervical stenosis.
Color Doppler shows vascularity within the mass.
Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Endometrial carcinoma is the most common female gynecologic malignancy and is thought
to be caused by prolonged estrogen exposure. Specific risk factors include nulliparity,
hormone replacement therapy (HRT), and tamoxifen.
Over 95% of endometrial carcinoma presents with postmenopausal bleeding. The average
endometrial thickness of patients with endometrial carcinoma is 21 mm.
In patients with postmenopausal bleeding, endometrial thickness 25 mm requires further
workup (usually biopsy and/or hysteroscopy). If endometrial thickness <5 mm, this most
likely represents endometrial atrophy.
For patients on HRT, postmenopausal bleeding with endometrial thickness 28 mm requires further
workup. This cutoff accounts for effects of HRT on endometrial proliferation. If HRT is given cyclically,
imaging should be repeated when patient is off HRT.
Without bleeding, endometrium thickness 28-11 mm (based on source) requires workup.
Although uncommonly seen in the absence of bleeding, the finding most suggestive of
endometrial carcinoma is the presence of ill-defined margins separating the endometrium
and the myometrium.
Staging of endometrial carcinoma
MRI can be used for staging once endometrial carcinoma is confirmed by histologic
sampling.
Staging of endometrial carcinoma is based on the International Federation of Gynecology
and Obstetrics (FIGO) system, which characterizes extent of disease based on involvement
of the cervix, vagina, uterine serosa, adnexa, adjacent bladder/bowel, inguinal lymph nodes,
and/or distant metastases.
The presence (and extent) of myometrial invasion is key for staging purposes. In a
premenopausal patient, an intact junctional zone confirms no myometrial invasion. The
junctional zone cannot be distinguished in post-menopausal patients.
The depth of myometrial invasion highly correlates with the presence of lymph node
metastasis.
Postcontrast images demonstrate the tumor with the highest conspicuity, as endometrial
cancer enhances less avidly than the surrounding myometrium.
GU: 304