CONGENITAL PROXIMAL BOWEL OBSTRUCTION
All causes of congenital proximal bowel obstruction are surgical. The primary purpose of an
upper GI is to distinguish between midgut volvulus (requiring emergent surgery) and bowel
atresia, which requires a non-emergent repair.
Duodenal atresia, stenosis, and web
Duodenal atresia: Abdominal radiograph (left image) shows the classic double bubble sign, with a distended
stomach (yellow arrows) and a distended duodenal bulb (red arrows). Upper-GI study (right image) shows a
markedly distended duodenum (red arrows) and no contrast passage into the jejunum.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD and Carlo Buonomo, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
During embryogenesis, the duodenum forms as a solid tube. Lack of recanalization causes
the spectrum of diseases ranging from duodenal atresia (complete lack of recanalization) to
duodenal stenosis (partial recanalization).
Al less severe variant, the duodenal web, allows liquids to pass, but causes the windsock
deformity after the child begins to eat solid foods, which get stuck in the web.
About 80% of cases occur just distal to the ampulla, therefore patients typically present with
bilious emesis.
Even a complete atresia does not preclude distal bowel gas. In the presence of a rare
congenital bifid common bile duct, bowel gas can travel through the ampulla of Vater and
enter the distal bowel.
Duodenal anomalies are associated with other abnormalities in 50% of cases, most
commonly Down syndrome (30% of cases). Other associated anomalies include:
VACTERL.
Cardiac shunt vascularity (ASD, VSD, PDA, and endocardial cushion defect).
Malrotation.
Annular pancreas, seen in 20% of babies with duodenal atresia.
The classic radiographic appearance of duodenal atresia is the double bubble sign caused
by dilation of both the stomach and the proximal duodenum, without distal bowel gas. A
patient with a double bubble and no distal bowel gas can be presumed to have duodenal
atresia.
If distal bowel gas is present with a double bubble sign, the differential diagnosis includes
midgut volvulus, annular pancreas (pancreas wraps around the duodenum), and the less
severe variants of duodenal atresia including duodenal stenosis and web.
Peds: 1131