Retropharyngeal abscess
Retropharyngeal abscess, a purulent infection
of the retropharyngeal space, is a common
cause of nontraumatic prevertebral soft tissue
swelling in children, typically at ages 6-12
months or 2-4 years.
As a general rule of thumb, the prevertebral
soft tissues should not exceed half the
vertebral body width at C1-C3, and one
vertebral body width at C4 and below.
Effacement of the normal subglottic step-off
between C4-C5 is a worrisome sign.
Prevertebral pseudothickening can be seen if a
radiograph is obtained with poor inspiration or neck
flexion. Airway fluoroscopy may obviate the need
for CT by viewing effacement of the prevertebral
Retropharyngeal abscess: Lateral neck radiograph
soft tissues in real-time.
shows marked thickening of the prevertebral
CT is usually necessary to determine the nature tissues (arrows). Although nonspecific, this patient
of radiographic retropharyngeal swelling.
had a retropharyngeal abscess.
The differential of nontraumatic prevertebral swelling also includes retropharyngeal
cellulitis, lymphoma, and foregut duplication cyst.
Retropharyngeal cellulitis appears similar to pharyngeal abscess on radiography, but no drainable fluid
collection is seen on CT. It is most commonly secondary to severe cellulitis or tonsillitis.
Air within a retropharyngeal abscess is rare unless a foreign body has perforated the esophagus.
Complications include Lemierre syndrome (thrombosis of the internal jugular vein with
septic pulmonary emboli) or mediastinitis (mediastinal extension via the danger space).
Exudative (bacterial) tracheitis
Exudative tracheitis may present similarly to epiglottitis with fever, stridor, and potentially
life-threatening respiratory distress.
In contrast to croup, exudative tracheitis tends to affect older children (ages 6-10 years) and
is bacterial in etiology (most commonly S. aureus).
On imaging, linear filling defects representing intraluminal membranes may be visible in the
subglottic and cervical trachea (candle dripping sign).
Summary of infectious causes of stridor
Croup
Retropharyngeal abscess Epiglottitis
Exudative tracheitis
Imaging
Steeple sign: symmetric Prevertebral soft tissue
Thumbprint. sign: enlarged Candle dripping sign:
findings
loss of normal subglottic swelling
epiglottis; thickened
linear filling defects in
shouldering
aryepiglottic folds
the airway
Age at
6 months-4 years (peak 6-12 months; 2-4 years Historically 3.5 years; more 6-10 years
presentation 1-2 years)
recently in teens and the
immunocompromised
Pathogen Parainfluenza > RSV
H. influenzae
S. aureus
Differential Subglottic hemangioma: Pseudothickening: neck Omega epiglottis: normal
diagnosis asymmetric narrowing of flexion or poor inspiration esophagus when imaged
subglottic trachea
Suppurative node: more obliquely
lateral within the neck
Peds: 1088