Xenon-133 (ventilation)
Xenon-133 is an inhaled gas with a physical half-life of 5.3 days, which emits 81 keV gamma
photons and is also a beta-emitter. The critical organ is the trachea. The biologic half-
life is very short because the vast majority of the gas is exhaled. Although 10-20 mCi is
administered, there is very little radiation exposure.
Xenon-133 is imaged posteriorly to avoid breast artifacts, as the relatively low keV is easily
attenuated by soft tissue. Wash-in/washout imaging can be performed to evaluate for air
trapping, which is seen in COPD.
Xenon-133 requires good patient cooperation as the patient must breathe on a closed
spirometer for several minutes. Exhaled xenon-133 must be carefully disposed of, either
exhausted to the atmosphere or trapped in a charcoal trap until it decays. Xenon-133 must
be administered in a negative pressure room to prevent accidental leakage.
Because xenon-133 is soluble in fat, it can accumulate in the liver, particularly a fatty liver.
Tc-99m DTPA (ventilation)
Tc-99m DTPA is a technetium-labeled aerosol. Unlike Xenon-133, DTPA does not allow
for dynamic wash-in/washout imaging. Once inhaled, the particles remain in place for
approximately 45-60 minutes (20 minutes in smokers). 30 mCi is typically administered.
Compared to xenon, Tc99m DTPA has greater ease of use. Specific advantages include the
ability to image in multiple projections, little requirement for patient cooperation, no need
for exhaust systems, ability to use portably and be delivered through mechanical ventilation.
Swallowed activity can be seen in the esophagus and stomach.
CLINICAL V/Q SCANNING IN THE ERA OF CT PULMONARY ANGIOGRAPHY
Diagnosis of pulmonary embolism in pregnancy
Pulmonary embolism is the leading cause of death in pregnancy in the developed world, and
diagnosis must be weighed against radiation exposure to the mother and the fetus.
CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA): Maternal breast dose approximately 10-70 mGy (much greater than
ACR mammography guidelines of 3 mGy/breast). Fetal dose 0.01-0.66 mGy.
V/Q scan: Maternal breast dose <1.5 mGy. Fetal dose 0.5-1.1 mGy (higher than CTPA but still
considerably lower than the 100 mSv threshold for potential teratogenic effects).
Low-dose perfusion (Q) scan: Maternal breast dose 0.6 mGy. Fetal dose 0.1-0.2 mGy.
In most cases, only perfusion scan is necessary and ventilation scan is not commonly
performed. The administered dose of Tc-99m MAA is typically one-half of the standard dose,
or approximately 100,000 particles.
Diagnostic accuracy for PE has been shown to be equivalent between CTPA and Q scan.
The primary advantage of CTPA is the demonstration of an alternative diagnosis not seen
on plain radiographs approximately 5% of the time and a lower fetal dose, at the expense of
increased breast radiation exposure.
Nuclear medicine perfusion scan should be reserved for suspected pulmonary embolism
in a pregnant patient with a normal chest radiograph, no history of asthma or COPD, and
a negative duplex ultrasound of lower extremities. In clinical practice, CTPA is more readily
available and often the prefered modality.
Nucs: 469