Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP)
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the clinical syndrome of UIP with unknown cause
and is the most common cause of UIP. IPF has a much worse clinical outcome compared to
secondary causes of UIP.
The mean survival of IPF is not much different compared to lung cancer. Of all the interstitial pneumonias,
only acute interstitial pneumonitis (AIP) has a worse prognosis.
Clinical symptoms of IPF include dry cough and dyspnea.
IPF usually affects male patients >50 years old, and typically smokers.
Other triggers of lung injury that may result in a UIP pattern include:
Collagen vascular disease (rheumatoid arthritis much more commonly than scleroderma).
Drug toxicity.
Asbestosis.. An imaging clue to the presence of asbestosis is calcified plaques indicative of prior asbestos
exposure.
The pathology of UIP features interstitial fibroblastic foci and chronic alveolar inflammation
with temporal and spatial heterogeneity.
Noncontrast CT shows subpleural
reticulations and honeycombing
(arrow).
Early UIP features reticulation in the posterior subpleural lung bases.
In later stages of UIP, traction bronchiectasis and subpleural honeycombing develop. The
lung bases are the most severely affected.
Surgical biopsy can be avoided if characteristic features, in particular peripheral basal
location of reticulation, are present. The American Thoracic Society (ATS) developed
updated guidelines in 2018 for how to characterize a UIP pattern on CT.
ATS Guidelines on ILD Patterns
UIP
Probable UIP
Indeterminate for UIP Alternative Diagnosis1. Subpleural, basal 1. Subpleural, basal 1. Very early fibrosis Any of:
predominancet
predominance
with subpleural + 1. Upper or mid-lung2. Reticulation2. Reticulation
basal predominance
predominant*3. Honeycombing 3. No honeycombing2. Peribronchovascular:4. Absence of4. Absence of
OR
predominant***
inconsistent
inconsistent3. Predominant GG*,**
features
features2. Atypical distribution 4. Micronodules
but no findings to 5. Extensive mosaic/air
suggest alternative
trapping*
diagnosis6. Nodules, consolidation,
or cysts* Suggests chronic HP ** Suggests NSIP
2018 Update
t Diffuse or asymmetric: allowed
Chest: 55