SCHEMIC HEART DISEASE
IMAGING OF MYOÇARDIAL INFARCTION
Plain film evaluation of myocardial infarction
The majority of initial plain chest radiographs obtained in patients with acute myocardial
infarction (MI) are normal; however, the most common abnormality seen is increased
pulmonary venous pressure (or overt pulmonary edema).
The presence of pulmonary edema after MI is a poor prognostic indicator.
The plain chest radiograph can evaluate for some complications of acute MI such as
pericardial effusion, left ventricular aneurysm, and papillary muscle rupture. It can also
suggest an alternative cause for the patient's acute chest pain, such as pneumothorax or
pneumonia.
MR imaging of myocardial infarction
Similar to stress echocardiography and nuclear scintigraphy (discussed earlier in this
chapter), cardiac MRI can be used with pharmacologic stress to evaluate for myocardial
ischemia. Cine MRI demonstrates wall motion abnormality or decreased wall thickening in
affected coronary artery territory. Stress perfusion MRI demonstrates regional perfusion
deficit on first-pass contrast-enhanced images; the subendocardial layer is always involved.
Pharmacologic stress cardiac MRI shows RCA ischemia (left image is rest, right is stress): First-pass cine images
show regadenoson-induced first pass myocardial perfusion defect involving the apical inferior and inferoseptal
segments (red arrows) in keeping with moderate size ischemia in the right coronary artery territory.
Myocardial viability can be assessed by delayed contrast-enhanced MRI. Both acute
(necrotic) and chronic (fibrotic) myocardial infarctions show late gadolinium enhancement,
while viable myocardium does not.
Greater than 50% transmural LGE indicates low likelihood of recovery of function after
revascularization therapy.
Myocardial edema in region of acute infarct demonstrates increased T2 signal and is usually
larger than the area of LGE (necrotic myocardium). The edematous region without LGE
represents myocardium at risk for ischemia.
Cardiac: 521