Acute hematoma (6-72 hours): Intracellular deoxyhemoglobin
After the red cells desaturate (lose oxygen), the entire hematoma becomes hypointense on
T2-weighted images and iso- to mildly hypointense on T1-weighted images.
Early subacute hematoma (3 days to 1 week): Intracellular methemoglobin
The subacute phase is characterized by methemoglobin, which is paramagnetic and
undergoes proton-electron dipole-dipole interactions (PEDDI) with water. PEDDI shortens
T1 to cause hyperintensity on T1-weighted images. Intracellular and extracellular
methemoglobin are both hyperintense on T1-weighted images.
In the early subacute phase, blood remains hypointense on T2-weighted images due to the
paramagnetic effects of methemoglobin, which remains trapped in the red cells.
Late subacute hematoma (1 week to months): Extracellular methemoglobin (after RBC lysis)
The methemoglobin PEDDI effect persists after cell lysis, causing continued hyperintensity
on T1-weighted images.
Paramagnetic effects of methemoglobin lessens. Signal intensity on T2-weighted images
increases to that of CSF, due to RBC lysis and decrease in protein concentration.
There may be peripheral enhancement of a subacute to chronic infarct.
Chronic sequelae of hemorrhage: Hemosiderin and ferritin
Salvaged iron atoms are deposited into hemosiderin and ferritin, which become
permanently trapped in the brain parenchyma after the blood-brain barrier is restored.
Susceptibility effects of the stored iron produce characteristic hypointensity on T2-weighted
and GRE images.
Chronic hemorrhage may have peripheral enhancement.
NON-TRAUMATIC CAUSES OF INTRAPARENCHYMAL HEMORRHAGE
Hypertensive hemorrhage
Hypertensive hemorrhage: Two contiguous noncontrast CT images show a left thalamic hemorrhage (yellow
arrow) with extension into the left ventricle occipital horn (red arrows).
Chronic hypertension is the most common cause of spontaneous adult intraparenchyma
hemorrhage and is due to the secondary microangiopathic effects of chronic hypertension.
Chronic hypertension causes arteriolar smooth muscle hyperplasia, which eventually leads
to smooth muscle death and replacement with collagen. The resultant vascular ectasia
predisposes to hemorrhage.
Neuro Brain: 695