PEDIATRIC CARDIAC
APPROACH TO THE PLAIN FILM OF CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Plain film evaluation of congenital heart disease: Of historical interest only?
Most congenital heart disease is diagnosed in utero during routine fetal ultrasound.
If a newborn has unexpected shortness of breath with clinical concern for a cardiac cause,
an echocardiogram is typically the imaging study of choice. Advanced imaging, such as CTA
or MRI, may also be helpful in certain clinical situations.
Even though the specific diagnosis of congenital heart disease may not be determined from
the plain radiograph, there is value in describing the radiographic findings (e.g., increased
pulmonary vascularity, cardiomegaly, etc.).
Plain film evaluation of congenital heart disease: Three questions to ask
First, is the patient cyanotic or acyanotic?
Second, is the pulmonary vascularity increased or decreased? This can be either increased
venous flow, increased arterial flow, or decreased arterial flow.
Increased vascularity can be determined by examining the peripheral 1/3 of the lungs where there is
normally very little blood flow. Increased peripheral vasculature suggests either increased pulmonary
venous or pulmonary arterial flow.
1) Increased pulmonary venous flow (pulmonary edema) is seen when the left ventricular outflow tract
can't keep up with venous return.
Causes include left heart insufficiency, obstructive left heart lesion, or congestive heart failure.
Peripheral 1/3 of the lungs shows indistinct vessels and septal markings.
2) Increased pulmonary arterial flow (shunt vascularity) tends to present in childhood rather than
infancy. It is caused by a left-to-right shunt, which leads to the right side of the heart pumping too much
blood to the lungs via the pulmonary arteries.
Peripheral 1/3 of the lungs shows distinct, large-caliber vessels.
3) Decreased pulmonary arterial flow is due to right ventricular outflow tract insufficiency.
Any lesion causing decreased pulmonary arterial flow is ALWAYS cyanotic because not enough
blood is being oxygenated in the lungs.
Peripheral 1/3 of the lungs shows decreased vasculature.
Third, is the heart enlarged or normal in size? Note, it is never: smaller than normal (even in
hypoplastic left heart syndrome).
Additional findings, such as specific contour to the aorta and cardiac chambers, orientation
of the aortic arch, and side of stomach bubble can help refine the diagnosis.
Plain film evaluation of congenital heart disease: Can it be anything else?
It is important to remember that an apparently enlarged heart and abnormal pulmonary
vasculature can be due to other diseases in addition to congenital heart disease, including:
Intracardiac tumor, such as a rhabdomyoma.
CHF due to a peripheral shunt (e.g., vein of Galen malformation or hepatic nemangoendotneloma.
Mediastinal mass.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia with non-aerated bowel.
Bronchiolitis may also mimic pulmonary edema, particularly in children with congenital heart disease.
Peds: 1107