Plaque vulnerability
High-risk (vulnerable) atherosclerotic plaques are associated with increased risk of acute
coronary syndrome. High-risk features include low-attenuation plaque (<30 HU), spotty
calcification, positive remodeling, and the napkin-ring sign.
There is no established guideline for management of patients with vulnerable plaques.
Napkin-ring sign: low-
Low-attenuation plaque
attenuation core (yellow
(arrow) measures less
arrow) surrounded by
than 30 HU on CTA.
higher attenuation rim
(red arrow).
Positive remodeling: characterized
by compensatory enlargement of
the vessel wall at site of plaque
(yellow arrows) beyond the
normal caliber (red arrows), with
preserved vessel lumen.
Also seen are spotty calcifications
(blue arrows).
Evaluation of coronary stents and bypass grafts
Two major complications following coronary artery stenting are stent thrombosis (in the
acute setting) and in-stent restenosis (a late complication). In-stent restenosis occurs by
neointimal hyperplasia and appears as low-attenuation material within the stent lumen.
Unfortunately, CCTA evaluation of coronary stents remains difficult and adequate
visualization of the stent lumen depends on various factors, including stent type, diameter,
location, presence of motion or blooming artifacts.
Cross-sectional CTA image of a coronary stent shows
low-attenuation material in the lumen, consistent
with in-stent restenosis.
Potential complications of bypass grafts are graft stenosis, occlusion, and aneurysm
formation. One pitfall on imaging is that a completely occluded graft can be difficult to
discern, with the only hint being an outpouching at the graft-aortic anastomosis.
Coronary bypass grafts can be accurately evaluated by CCTA, however because beam
hardening and streak artifacts from adjacent surgical clips can obscure findings, cardiac
catheterization remains the preferred diagnostic modality at most locations.
Stenoses of both coronary stents and bypass grafts are graded similarly to those of native
coronary arteries, using the CAD-RADS.
Cardiac: 513