Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH)
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is a benign liver mass that can have a variable appearance
on a sulfur colloid scan. Most commonly, FNH will be indistinguishable from background
liver due to Kupffer cells within the FNH. FNH may also have increased uptake due to a
combination of hypervascularity and Kupffer sulfur colloid uptake. In approximately 1/3 of
cases there is insufficient colloid concentration and FNH may appear as a photopenic defect.
In contrast to FNH, a hepatic adenoma does not contain Kupffer cells and will be consistently
photopenic.
An adjunct or alternative to sulfur colloid scan is a HIDA scan. FNH contains biliary ductules
SO it should demonstrate radiotracer uptake on a HIDA scan.
Intrapancreatic splenic tissue
The presence of an intrapancreatic splenule can be confirmed by sulfur colloid scan in
indeterminate cases, where the suspected tissue will show uptake. A Tc-99m damaged red
cell study can also be performed.
Splenosis: Liver-spleen scan (5.5 mCi
Tc-99m sulfur colloid administered) of
a patient with history of splenectomy
following trauma.
Anterior and posterior images show
scattered focal uptake in the abdomen
correlating to intraperitoneal soft
20
tissue masses on SPECT/CT (not
shown), consistent with splenosis.
ESOPHAGEAL AND GASTRIC MOTILITY
Radiotracer: Tc-99m sulfur colloid or DTPA
Sulfur colloid or DTPA are mixed with food and ingested to assess gastroesophageal motility.
Esophageal transit
After a 6-hour or overnight fast, patient is positioned supine and instructed to swallow
10 mL water containing Tc-99m sulfur colloid or DTPA, then attempt dry swallows to clear
normal residual activity in the esophagus. This process may be repeated several times.
Normal esophageal transit time for water is 5-11 seconds, with more than 90% of peak
activity clearing the esophagus after 15 seconds. Reduced transit time is seen in patients
with scleroderma and achalasia.
Gastroesophagea! reflux
Scintigraphy for gastroesophageal reflux is most commonly performed in neonates. After an
overnight fast, the infant is fed formula or milk mixed with Tc-99m sulfur colloid. Sequential
images are acquired to assess for reflux of gastric content into the esophagus. Delayed
images of the lungs can be obtained to evaluate for aspiration.
A similar protocol is used for older children and adults, but using orange juice.
Salivagram for aspiration
Salivagram is more sensitive in detecting aspiration in pediatric patients compared to
reflux scintigraphy. A drop of Tc-99m sulfur colloid is placed on the patient's tongue base or
sublingual region to allow mixture with saliva. Rapid images are then obtained to assess for
activity in the bronchi and lungs.
Nucs: 463