CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Coronary artery calcium score
A gated noncontrast cardiac CT can be obtained independently or prior to contrast-
enhanced CCTA for calcium scoring. Coronary artery calcification is a marker for CAD.
Any area > 3 pixels in a coronary artery with density greater than 130 HU is considered to
contain calcium. The Agatston score represents the total calcium in the coronary tree. It can
predict the risk of future major adverse cardiovascular events and guide preventive therapy.
Coronary calcium scoring is appropriate for risk stratification in asymptomatic patients
without known CAD and with:
(1). An intermediate 10-year ASCVD (arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease) risk estimate;
Or (2) a family history of premature CAD and a low 10-year ASCVD risk estimate.
Coronary artery stenosis
The Coronary Artery Disease Reporting and Data System (CAD-RADS) was introduced in
2016 to provide standard classification of CAD, reduce reader variability, and facilitate
communication between interpreting and referring clinicians.
CAD-RADS categories 0, 1, and 2 (stenosis <50%) represent nonobstructive CAD and do
not require further workup. Non-atherosclerotic causes of patient's chest pain should be
considered.
Stenosis >50% is considered obstructive and potentially hemodynamically significant, which
requires further workup. CAD-RADS 3 is moderate stenosis 50-69%). CAD-RADS 4 is severe
stenosis (70-99%) or significant stenosis (>50%) in the left main coronary artery (LMCA).
CAD-RADS 5 is total occlusion of at least one coronary artery.
When one or more coronary artery segment is not evaluable and the rest show <50%
stenosis, the study is considered nondiagnostic (CAD-RADS category N). Coronary segments
smaller than 1.5 mm in diameter are not classifiable by CAD-RADS.
CAD-
RADS Interpretation
Stenosis
Workup and management
0 No CAD
0%
Reassurance.
1 Minimal CAD
1-24%
Preventative therapy.
2 Mild CAD
25-49%
Preventative therapy.
3 Moderate stenosis 50-69%
Consider functional testing and preventative
therapy.
4 Severe stenosis
70-99%, or Functional testing or invasive coronary angiography.
>50% LMCA Consider revascularization.
5 Occlusion
100%
Same as for CAD-RADS 4.
Cardiac: 512