CYSTIC PELVIC MASSES
The differential diagnosis for cystic pediatric pelvic masses depends on the sex of the child.
A pediatric cystic pelvic mass is most likely due to a congenital genitourinary anomaly.
Either sex
A urachal anomaly results from incomplete obliteration of the embryologic allantois. The
urachus is the remnant of the allantois, which connects the urinary bladder to the umbilical
cord. There is a risk of adenocarcinoma if a urachal anomaly is not resected.
Patent urachus (most common): Connection between bladder and umbilicus (vesico-cutaneous fistula).
Urachal cyst: Noncommunicating cyst in between the bladder and umbilicus.
Urachal sinus: Blind-ending sinus at umbilicus.
Vesicourachal diverticulum: Blind-ending bladder diverticulum.
A rectal duplication cyst is a rare type of gastrointestinal duplication cyst, usually occurring
in the retrorectal space. They are typically resected due to malignant potential.
Girls only
A dilated fluid or blood-filled vagina and/or uterus may be in response to hormonal
stimulation and outflow obstruction, either in the neonatal period (fluid-filled) or at puberty
(blood-filled).
Hydrometrocolpos: Vagina and uterus dilated with fluid. Hydrocolpos: Vagina dilated with fluid.
Hematometrocolpos: Dilated vagina and uterus filled with blood; occurs at menarche with vaginal outflow
tract obstruction (e.g., congenital imperforate hymen).
Ovarian dermoid cyst, otherwise known as a mature cystic teratoma.
Boys only
Al Mullerian duct cyst is caused by incomplete regression of the Mullerian ducts. In a
normal male, the Mullerian ducts regress. A persistent Mullerian duct remnant can cause a
Mullerian duct cyst.
In a normal female, Mullerian ducts paramesonephric ducts) develop into the fallopian tubes, uterus,
cervix, and upper vagina.
The prostatic utricle is a normal midline structure that is the terminal remnant of the
Mullerian duct. It arises from the posterior urethra near the verumontanum (ridge of the
posterior urethra near the seminal vesicle insertion). When associated with hypospadia
(urethra opens along the ventral penile shaft), a prostatic utricle can become very large.
SOLID PELVIC MASSES
Solid pelvic masses are less likely to represent genitourinary anomalies, and are more
concerning for neoplasm.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common sarcoma of childhood, occurring equally
commonly in the pelvis (bladder, vagina, cervix, uterus, etc.) and head and neck (together
making up almost 80% of cases).
Imaging features a characteristic lobulated bunch of grapes appearance (Botryoid variant).
Sacrococcygeal teratoma
Sacrococcygeal teratoma is usually apparent on pre-natal imaging. When detected after
birth the characteristic clinical appearance is a skin-covered mass extending from the
midline buttocks.
Sacrococcygeal teratoma has a heterogeneous imaging appearance with cystic, solid, and
fatty components.
Peds: 1158