Fungal rhinosinusitis
Allergic fungal sinusitis: Coronal (left image) and axial noncontrast CT shows marked pan-sinus disease with
curvilinear hyperattenuation in the affected sinuses (arrows). There is erosion of the ethmoid sinus walls.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Fungal sinus diseases are classified as noninvasive or invasive, based on extension to the
submucosa, vessels, and/or bone.
Noninvasive fungal rhinosinusitis includes allergic fungal rhinosinusitis and fungal ball.
Affected patients are mmunocompetent.
Invasive fungal rhinosinusitis is divided into acute and chronic forms. The vast majority of
affected patients have diabetes mellitus or are immunocompromised (e.g., hematologic
malignancy, chemotnerapy-related neutropenia, transplantation).
Noninvasive and chronic invasive fungal rhinosinusitis are most commonly due to Aspergillus
and dematiaceous (brown-black) molds. Acute invasive fungal rhinosinusitis is most
commonly caused by aspergillosis or mucormycosis.
Allergic fungal rhinosinusitis is the most common form of fungal sinusitis, representing
a subtype/variant of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis caused by a localized
hypersensitivity reaction to fungi, typically in atopic individuals.
Imaging shows complete opacification of multiple sinuses with secretions that are hyperattenuating (CT)
and low T2 signal intensity (MRI) and cause expansile remodeling/pressure erosion of the sinus walls.
Fungus balls are dense aggregates of (noninvasive) hyphae and (nonallergic) mucin separate
from the sinus mucosa.
Imaging shows opacification of a single sinus (usually maxillary) with an irregular mass that is
hyperattenuating (CT) and low T2 signal intensity (MRI), often with intralesional mineralization/
calcification. There may be bony erosion.
Invasive fungal rhinosinusitis is a serious acute or chronic infection where fungal hyphae
invade mucosa, vessels, and/or other sinonasal tissues and cause necrosis.
The most common but nonspecific imaging finding of invasive fungal rhinosinusitis is severe unilateral
sinonasal opacification.
Later in the disease course, more specific imaging signs include extrasinus soft tissue infiltration into the
premaxillary and retroantral fat, intracranial or orbital involvement, and bony erosion.
Non-enhancement of a nasal turbinate on MRI (black turbinate sign) in an immunocompromised patient is
highly suggestive of necrosis in the setting of invasive fungal rhinosinusitis.
Neuro Head & Neck: 758