Avascular necrosis (AVN; continued)
Avascular necrosis (AVN) is focal ischemia of the epiphyseal region or subchondral bone.
AVN leads to trabecular necrosis, which increases susceptibility to subchondral collapse,
and secondary osteoarthritis if untreated. The more general term osteonecrosis indicates
necrosis of bone and marrow elements.
The femoral head is especially susceptible to AVN because of precarious blood supply. The
blood supply to the femoral head is primarily through the medial femoral circumflex artery,
which enters the femoral neck and gives off posterosuperior epiphyseal branches that
course along the femoral neck to supply the femoral head.
As previous discussed, intracapsular proximal femur fractures have a high risk of AVN,
including femoral neck fractures in the elderly and transient subluxation in athletes.
Non-traumatic causes of AVN are usually systemic, including red-cell abnormalities (e.g.,
sickle cell disease), abnormalities of marrow packing (e.g., Gaucher disease), or secondary
effects of medications including steroids, alcohol, or immunosuppression from transplant.
Systemic causes of AVN tend to be bilateral.
A clue to the presence of Gaucher disease is splenomegaly with AVN.
A clue to the presence of sickle cell is a small calcified spleen with AVN.
It is optimal to diagnose AVN prior to subchondral collapse and secondary osteoarthritis.
Early AVN can be treated with medication/Irestyle changes and/or core decompression
(drilling of the subchondral bone, with the goal to reduce intraosseous pressure). Once
subchondral collapse and secondary osteoarthritis are present, treatment is generally
arthroplasty.
Several staging systems have been proposed for the radiographic and MRI classification
of AVN; however, from a practical standpoint the relative size of the AVN, status of the
subchondral bone plate (the "cortex" overlying the cartilage), and presence of secondary
osteoarthritis are helpful imaging findings to describe.
The most common appearance of AVN on MRI is a geographic subchondral lesion outlined
by a serpentine low signal rim on T1-weighted images. The subchondral anterior-superior
portions of the femoral head, at 10 o'clock and 2 o'clock on coronal images, are typical
locations.
The double line sign is seen on T2-weighted MRI and is comprised of a peripheral low-
intensity rim and an inner high-intensity band. The double line sign is thought to be
pathognomonic for AVN.
Bone marrow edema is present in 50% and clinically correlates with pain.
Transient bone marrow edema (TBME)
Transient bone marrow edema (TBME), also called transient osteoporosis of the hip, is a
controversial entity that is a diagnosis of exclusion and may actually reflect a combination
of disorders including sympathetic nervous system overactivity, stress fracture, or transient
ischemia.
The traditional teaching is that TBME is a self-limited clinical entity lasting a few months. It
is characterized by severe hip pain in young to middle-aged adults (more commonly men,
although it was first described in women in the third trimester of pregnancy).
Radiographs show regional osteopenia in the femoral head without any secondary signs of
arthritis. MRI shows edema throughout the femoral head.
As TBME may be a wastebasket diagnosis, it is essential to always evaluate for subtle lesions
to explain these findings. For instance, a subchondral hypointense line on T1-weighted
images may represent a fracture, or a small focus of AVN may be apparent.
MSK: 1041