Wilms tumor (continued)
The classic imaging appearance of Wilms is a heterogeneous, solid renal mass. The claw sign
indicates renal parenchyma origin. Tumor venous extension is seen in 5-10%. Calcifications
may be present but are uncommon. A cystic variant may mimic benign multilocular cystic
nephroma.
Liver or lung metastases are each seen in approximately 10%. Bone metastases are not
common, and when present in a pediatric renal mass are more suggestive of clear cell
sarcoma.
Staging of Wilms tumor uses the National Wilms Tumor Study (NWTS) system, which is a
combination of radiologic and post-surgical findings:
Stage : Completely resected mass confined to the kidney.
Two-year survival: 95%
Stage I: Completely resected mass with spread to nearby structures (e.g., renal capsule or blood vessels).
Two-year survival: 90%
Stage II: Incompletely resected mass with spread to nearby intra-abdominal structures.
Two-year survival: 85%
Stage IV: Hematogenous metastases (e.g., to lung, liver, bone, or brain) or lymphatic metastases outside
of the abdomen or pelvis.
Two-year survival: 55%
Stage V (unique to Wilms): Bilateral Wilms at the time of diagnosis (approximately 5-10%).
Two-year survival: Variable.
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
Although far more common in adults, renal cell cancer (RCC) does occur in older children
and adolescents, usually presenting at age 10-12 years. Overall, <1% of all RCCS occur in
children, typically in the setting of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.
Renal medullary carcinoma is an especially aggressive variant of RCC affecting patients with
sickle cell trait.
Rhabdoid tumor
Rhabdoid tumor is a rare, aggressive malignancy that may occur in the brain or kidney.
Imaging shows an il-defined, aggressive renal mass. Renal and CNS lesions may be
concurrent.
These lesions are typically seen in the first year of life, and have the worst prognosis of all
pediatric renal tumors.
The classic ultrasound and cross-sectional finding is a subcapsular fluid crescent, reflecting
renal hemorrhage.
Clear cell sarcoma
Clear cell sarcoma is an uncommon renal cancer with propensity to metastasize to bone.
Renal metastases
The most common primary malignancies to metastasize to the kidneys in children are
neuroblastoma, leukemia, and lymphoma.
Leukemia is characteristically infiltrative, diffuse, and bilateral.
Lymphoma has multiple imaging presentations, including multiple masses or diffuse
infiltration.
Peds: 1152