PET/CT
Basic positron emission tomography (PET) physics
A positron emission tomography (PET) radiotracer emits a positron that travels a small
local distance within the tissue. After meeting an electron, both the positron and electron
annihilate and create two 511 keV photons travelling nearly 180 degrees apart.
The two high-energy photons travelling in opposite directions are simultaneously
detected by a circular ring of crystals, which can determine that the two photons arrived
coincidentally.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS OF F-18 FDG PET/CT
Radiotracer: Fluorine-18 FDG
cell
blood vessel
hexokinase
glycolysis
gluc
glut 1/3
gluc
gluc
glucose-6phosphatase
hexokinase
FDG
glut 1/3
FDG
FDG
glucose-6phosphatase
Fluorine-18 (F-18) is a cyclotron-produced positron emitter, half-life 110 minutes.
1B-fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) is a glucose analog that competes with glucose for
transport into cells by the GLUT 1 and 3 transporters. After becoming phosphorylated by
hexokinase, FDG-phosphate cannot undergo glycolysis and is effectively trapped within cells.
Radiotracer uptake quantification
The standardized uptake value (SUV) roughly quantifies FDG uptake.
SUV is proportional to (ROI activity * body weight) / administered activity.
SUV of a region of interest can vary significantly depending on multiple factors including the
specific equipment used, time elapsed after FDG administration, the presence of any tracer
extravasation, blood glucose and insulin levels at time of injection, etc.
An SUV value above 2.5 traditionally has been suggestive of malignancy. However,
malignancy can never be definitively diagnosed or excluded using SUV as the sole criterion.
Size threshold for lesion detection on FDG PET is 6 mm. For small lesions, the average SUV
may be falsely low due to partial volume averaging; the maximum SUV is a better measure.
An alternative approach to calculating SUV values is visual or quantitative assessment of
FDG uptake relative to background activity in normal tissues (e.g., liver or cerebellum) or the
mediastinal blood pool.
Nucs: 445