Primary extradural tumors in adolescents and young adults
Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is a benign, progressively destructive lesion that occurs in
adolescents. Fluid levels are typically seen on MRI, though this finding is nonspecific.
Chondroblastoma is a benign but aggressive neoplasm that rarely may occur in the vertebral
column (vertebral body and posterior elements). Secondary ABC may be present.
Osteoid osteoma is a benign, sclerotic lesion affecting the vertebral posterior elements
in teenagers and young adults, with a classic clinical history of nocturnal pain relieved by
NSAIDS. A central radiolucent nidus consists of vascular fibrous connecting tissue.
Osteosarcoma is a malignant tumor that typically produces osteoid matrix.
Hemangioma
Vertebral hemangiomas are technically not neoplasms but low-flow vascular malformations,
predominantly the cavernous type. They are the most common benign "tumor" of the spine.
They are usually incidentally found and composed of endothelium-lined vascular structures.
Destruction of some of the bony trabeculae and thickening of the remaining trabeculae
produce the characteristic striated corduroy appearance on plain radiographs and sagittal/
coronal CT. The stippled appearance on axial CT is produced by thickened trabeculae seen in
cross-section.
Hemangioma is typically hyperintense on both T1- and T2-weighted images.
Although hemangioma is benign, an aggressive variant is occasionally seen in the thoracic
spine. The aggressive variant may have an epidural soft tissue component that has the
potential to cause cord compression.
Although the asymptomatic variant has no sex predilection, the aggressive form of hemangioma is more
common in females.
EXTRADURAL NON-NEOPLASTIC LESIONS
Disc degeneration
In the vast majority of cases, diagnosing disc degeneration, including bulges and protrusions,
is not a diagnostic dilemma (although accurately characterizing and describing such lesions
can be challenging even for experienced radiologists!).
However, occasionally a sequestered disc fragment may appear like an extradural mass. In
fact, since "funny looking" disc fragments are far more common than extradural tumors,
a extradural mass within the spinal canal is most likely to represent a sequestered disc
fragment. A contrast-enhanced exam can be very helpful to differentiate disc fragment
(generally non-enhancing) from a tumor (typically enhancing).
Sequestered disc:
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI demonstrates an
extradural mass (arrow) posterior to the
inferior endplate of a mid-lumbar vertebral
body.
Despite having different signal intensity from
the parent disc, this was a sequestered disc
fragment.
Spine: 880