CIRRHOSIS
Etiology and pathology
Cirrhosis is the replacement of functioning hepatocytes with dysfunctional fibrotic tissue,
caused by repeated cycles ofi injury and repair. Etiologies include metabolic (alcohol,
steatohepatitis, hemochromatosis, or Wilson disease), infectious (chronic hepatitis B or C),
or inflammatory (primary biliary cirrhosis or primary sclerosing cholangitis). The hallmarks
of cirrhosis are disorganized attempted regeneration in the form of nodules and fibrosis.
Intrahepatic signs of cirrhosis:1. Nodular contour of the liver2. Segmental atrophy and hypertrophy
Atrophy
Segment V, VI, VII, VIII (right lobe)
Segment IV (medial segment oft the left lobe)
Hypertrophy
Segment (caudate)
Segment II, III (lateral segment oft thel left lobe)3. Enlargement of thel hilar periportal space4. Expanded gallbladder fossa sign5. Peribiliary cysts6. Intrahepatic fibrosis7. Right posterior hepatic notch sign8. Iron deposition (not shown)
Early signs of cirrhosis
One of the earliest signs of cirrhosis is expansion of the periportal spaces. Atrophy of the
medial segment of the left hepatic lobe in early cirrhosis causes increased fat anterior to the
right main portal vein.
Enlargement of caudate lobe is a specific sign of cirrhosis. Specifically, a caudate to right
lobe size ratio of >0.65 highly suggests cirrhosis. As discussed previously, the caudate drains
directly to the IVC, not via the hepatic veins, which is initially protective against cirrhosis.
The empty gallbladder fossa sign results when hepatic parenchyma surrounding the
gallbladder is replaced with periportal fat.
Secondary manifestations of cirrhosis
Portal hypertension causes splenomegaly and formation of portosystemic collaterals/
varices, including recanalization of the paraumbilical vein.
Gamna-Gandy bodies are: splenic microhemorrhages secondary to portal hypertension. These appear as
tiny echogenic foci on US, tiny hypo- or hyperattenuating foci on CT, and tiny hypointense foci on in-phase
MRI. This is discussed further later in the chapter.
Gallbladder wall thickening is due to nypoalbuminemia and resultant edema.
Micronodular cirrhosis causes cirrhotic nodules less than 3 mm in size and is usually
associated with alcoholism.
GI: 103