EXTERNAL EAR
Anatomy of the external ear
The external (outer) ear is composed of the auricle (pinna), external auditory canal (EAC),
and tympanic membrane.
The EAC is a tube surrounded by fibrocartilage (laterally) and bone (medially) that sound
passes through before reaching the tympanic membrane.
The bony part of the EAC is bordered posteriorly and superiorly by mastoid air cells, while
the rest is formed by the tympanic part of the temporal bone.
Mastoidectomy procedures are distinguished by whether the posterosuperior walls of the EAC are
preserved (canal wall up mastoidectomy) or removed (canal wall down mastoidectomy).
The tympanic part of the temporal bone develops in parts that normally fuse at the anteroinferior
aspect in early childhood. Occasionally, incomplete fusion leaves a patent foramen of Huschke (foramen
tympanicum), a dehiscence connecting the EAC and temporomandibular joint.
Sound waves vibrate the tympanic membrane, which transmits mechanical energy to the
middle ear ossicles.
The tympanic membrane is divided into two sections: the pars tensa (larger, more inferior)
and the pars flaccida (smaller, more superior).
Congenital aural atresia/stenosis
Congenital aural atresia/stenosis is characterized by developmental narrowing or occlusion
of the EAC, often associated with malformation of the auricle (microtia), ossicles (especially
malleus and incus), and/or middle ear cavity.
The external and middle ear malformations are related by their development from the
first branchial cleft, first and second branchial arches, and first branchial pouch. Associated
anomalies of the inner ear are uncommon due to its separate origin from neuroectoderm.
Most cases are isolated, but aural atresia can be a part of several syndromes involving the
first and second branchial arches, especially Treacher-Collins syndrome and craniofacial
microsomia (inclusive of the prior terms hemifacial microsomia, Goldenhar syndrome, and
culcaurçulovertebra: spectrum).
Benign bony external auditory canal lesions
Exostosis: Axial noncontrast CT through the right and left temporal bones shows broad-based bony exostosis in
bilateral external auditory canals narrowing the canal lumen.
EAC exostosis, also known as surfer's ear, is a non-neoplastic, reactive bony outgrowth
projecting into the EAC seen in those who swim/surf in cold waters. It is more often sessile
and multiple.
EAC osteoma is the most common osseous neoplasm of the temporal bone. It is more often
solitary and pedunculated.
Neuro Head & Neck: 810