Cholesterol granuloma
Petrous apex cholesterol granuloma:. Axial T1-weighted (left image) and T2-weighted (right image) shows
al lobulated T1 hyperintense, heterogeneously T2 hyperintense, expansile lesion in the left petrous apex
(arrows). There is no associated restricted diffusion (not shown).
Cholesterol granuloma is a unique type of granulation tissue associated with friable blood
vessels. Histologically, it represents a giant cell reaction to cholesterol crystals.
Cholesterol granulomas are most commonly located in a pneumatized petrous apex but can
occur in any obstructed air space such as the mastoid and middle ear cavities.
Cholesterol granulomas in the middle ear may present on otoscopy as a blue retrotympanic
mass or as hemotympanum.
Cholesterol granuloma can expand and thin the surrounding bone. On MRI, the lesions
are typically hyperintense on T1-weighted images due to blood products and do not show
restricted diffusion, unlike cholesteatoma.
Otomastoiditis
Otomastoiditis refers to infection or inflammation in the middle ear and mastoid cavities.
Various terms are used clinically to classify this spectrum based on duration (acute or
chronic), presence and type of fluid (suppuration or serous effusion), and presence of
tympanic membrane perforation and/or cholesteatoma.
An imaging finding of fluid in the middle ear and mastoid is common and not specific for
clinically significant inflammation or infection. Otomastoiditis remains a clinical diagnosis,
while imaging is reserved to detect complications such as those below.
Coalescent mastoiditis is the advanced stage of acute mastoiditis in which osteitis is
present, defined on CT by resorption of the bony septae and thus merging of adjacent
opacified mastoid air cells.
Subperiosteal abscess results from coalescent mastoiditis that has eroded through the external mastoid
cortex but remains contained by periosteum, usually in the postauricular region. Further progression
through the periosteum is called a subcutaneous abscess.
Erosion through the mastoid tip can result in abscess tracking either along the sternocleidomastoid
muscle, called Bezold abscess, or along the posterior belly of the digastric muscle, called Citelli abscess.
Intracranial complications are the main cause of mortality in acute and chronic
otomastoiditis, including meningitis, epidural abscess, subdural empyema, cerebritis, brain
abscess, and dural venous sinus thrombosis.
Involvement of the inner ear (labyrinthitis) and petrous apex (petrous apicitis) are discussed
later in this temporal bone section.
Intratympanic sequelae of chronic otitis media that can contribute to hearing loss
include middle ear effusion, granulation tissue, cholesteatoma, cholesterol granuloma,
post-inflammatory ossicular fixation (including tympanosclerosis), and ossicular erosion
(especially at the long process of the incus).
Neuro Head & Neck: 818