SOLID RENAL MASSES = BENIGN
Angiomyolipoma (AML)
Axial noncontrast CT shows an exophytic mass (arrow) Axial T1-weighted MRI shows that the lesion is
in the right kidney containing macroscopic fat. There predominantly isointense to intra-abdominal fat.
are a few linear strands of soft tissue within the lesion.
Axial early arterial postcontrast T1-weighted fat
Late arterial postcontrast T1-weighted fat suppressed
suppressed image shows slight enhancement of the image shows more prominent enhancement of the
soft tissue components.
soft tissue components of the lesion.
Angiomyolpoma (AML) is a benign hamartoma made up of blood vessels (angio), smooth
muscle (myo), and fat (lipoma). AMLS are the most common benign renal neoplasm. Most
occur sporadically (unilateral and solitary), but 40% are associated with tuberous sclerosis
(typically multiple and bilateral).
Although benign, when AMLS are >4 cm in size, there is an increased risk of hemorrhage due
to microaneurysm rupture within the vascular components of the AML.
The presence of macroscopic fat in a non-calcified renal lesion is diagnostic of AML. The
nonfat-containing portion enhances avidly and homogeneously. Calcification is rare in AMLS
and should raise suspicion for RCC with macroscopic fat.
On ultrasound, AML is echogenic due to the fat component. There is considerable overlap
between the ultrasound appearance of AML and RCC. About one-third of AML demonstrate
shadowing, which is a specific finding for AML.
On MRI, the fat component will follow retroperitoneal fat on all sequences and will
saturate out on fat-saturated sequences. The muscle component will be T2 hypointense.
intracytoplasmic lipid is not a feature of AML, SO there should be no significant signal drop-
out on dual-echo in- and out-of-phase images on MRI.
4% of AMLS lack macroscopic fat and appear as hyperdense enhancing mass on CT. In such
cases, MRI can be helpful. A T2 hyperintense mass is suggestive of clear cell RCC or less likely
oncocytoma. A T2 hypointense mass may represent a fat-poor AML or papillary RCC, thus
biopsy is usually recommended for definitive diagnosis. In rare cases, RCC with macroscopic
fat has been described.
GU: 264