Ocular detachments and hemorrhage
Retinal detachment that is complete/extensive takes a "V" configuration, convergent on the
optic disc and extending to the ora serrata. Vitreous, serous, or hemorrhagic fluid fills the
subretinal space (between retina and choroid).
Retinal detachment is most commonly related to retinal tears (hegmatogenous), which can be traumatic
or, more often, spontaneous related to posterior vitreous detachment. Myopia is a major risk factor.
Non-rnegmatogenous causes consist of exudative effusion (e.g., infection, inflammation, neoplasm) or
traction related to neovascularization.
Retinal detachment: Axial noncontrast
CT shows increased attenuation in the
posterior left globe with a V-shaped
configuration.
-
t
Choroidal detachment takes an hourglass configuration that diverges as it approaches the
optic disc SO as to spare the posterior pole of the globe, can extend anteriorly beyond the
ora serrata, and can appose the retina at the convexities (kissing choroid sign). Serous or
hemorrhagic fluid fills the suprachoroidal space (between choroid and sclera).
The most common cause of choroidal detachment is ocular hypotony, which can be traumatic or, more
often, related to recent surgery. Other causes are inflammatory, neoplastic, or vascular.- -- I I
Choroidal detachment in two different patients:
Axial noncontrast CT (left image) shows extensive hyperdense hemorrhage in the left globe, including
choroidal detachment with subchoroidal hemorrhage resulting in the kissing choroid sign (yellow arrow).
There is also contour abnormality at the posterior globe concerning for open globe injury (red arrow).
Axial contrast-enhanced CT (right image) demonstrates choroidal detachment of the left globe with
hypodense subchoroidal blood products in an hourglass configuration. This was thought to be secondary
to intraocular metastatic squamous cell carcinoma, as suggested by the nodular enhancement at the
posterior globe (blue arrow), which was confirmed on subsequent MRI.
Vitreous hemorrhage appears as hyperattenuation of the posterior segment on CT.
Causes of vitreous hemorrhage include trauma (including abusive head trauma in young children),
spontaneous vitreous detachment and/or retinal tear, and conditions causing retinal neovascularity.
Terson syndrome is the association of vitreous hemorrhage (and/or retinal hemorrhage) secondary to
intracranial subarachnoid hemorrhage, likely related to elevated intracranial pressure.
Nonacute mimics include intraocular silicone oil used to treat retinal detachment.
Neuro Head & Neck: 783