ENTERITIS
Enteritis is inflammation of the small bowel. The most common CT manifestation of enteritis
is bowel wall thickening. Mesenteric stranding or free fluid may also be present.
Crohn's disease
Crohn's disease is a chronic granulomatous inflammatory condition which may affect any
part of the GI tract from the mouth to the anus, though most commonly involves the
terminal ileum. Bowel involvement is discontinuous, with characteristic skip lesions with
intervening normal GI tract.
The earliest histologic changes occur in the submucosa, seen on imaging as aphthous ulcers
due to ymphoid hyperplasia and lymphedema.
There are three phenotypes that may exist independently or may coexist. Imaging findings
include:
Active inflammation: Mural hyperenhancement, intramural edema, mural ulcerations.
Stricturing disease: Luminal narrowing with upstream dilatation.
Penetrating disease*: Sinus tracts, simple fistulas, complex fistulas, inflammatory mass, abscess.
*Perianal disease is not considered penetrating disease.
Endoscopy and barium fluoroscopy (small bowel follow-through, enteroclysis, and barium
enema) have historically been the modalities to evaluate Crohn's disease. CT and MR
enterography are now the exams of choice.
The advantages of CT and MRI are the ability to evaluate the entire bowel wall (not just the mucosa),
presence of extraintestinal complications, and the vasculature.
The disadvantages of CT and MRI compared to fluoroscopy and endoscopy are reduced spatial resolution
and limited sensitivity for detecting subtle early signs of disease.
The most common imaging findings on all modalities are wall thickening and inflammatory
changes of the terminal ileum.
Fluoroscopic findings include thickened, nodular folds in the affected regions of small bowel,
luminal narrowing, mucosal ulceration, and separation of bowel loops (due to fibrofatty
proliferation). The typical cobblestone appearance seen on endoscopy and fluoroscopy is a
result of crisscrossing deep ulcerations.
CT/MRI findings of Crohn's disease include:
Creeping. fat describes widely separated loops of bowel due to fibrofatty proliferation.
Comb sign describes engorged vasa recta (mesenteric blood vessels) adjacent to an inflamed bowel loop.
Pseudosacculation describes the bulging appearance along the antimesenteric border which is spared
compared to the fibrotic and shortened mesenteric side.
Restricted diffusion, when seen with other findings of active inflammation, indicates more severe disease.
There is an increased risk of developing adenocarcinoma SO close attention should be paid
for any nodular thickening of the bowel wall.
GI: 205