Syndesmotic ligaments
Anterior tibiofibular ligament
Tibia
Fibula
Posterior tibiofibular ligament
The syndesmosis is a fibrous ligamentous complex that connects the distal tibia and fibula,
where the distal fibula fits into a groove in the distal tibia.
The major ligaments of the syndesmosis are the anterior and posterior tibiofibular
ligaments. Other ligaments interposed between these are less important.
Injury to the syndesmosis tends to occur like opening a book, with tear of the anterior
tibiofibular ligament, followed by tear of the posterior tibiofibular ligament in higher-grade
injuries. There are usually ankle fractures by the time the posterior tibiofibular ligament is
torn, but the anterior tibiofibular ligament can tear without fracture.
Ankle sprains
Sprains are the most common ankle injury. These are usually due to ankle inversion, and the
anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) of the lateral collateral ligamentous complex is the most
commonly torn ligament in ankle sprains.
A "high ankle sprain" is a COlloqua/intorma. term for injury to the syndesmosis (most
commonly the anterior syndesmotic (anterior tibiofibular) ligament, without fracture.
Ankle fractures
Injury to the lateral collateral ligaments is much less common in ankle fractures. The
syndesmotic ligaments are the most commonly torn ligaments in ankle fractures.
The Danis-Weber classification (commonly shortened to the Weber classification) is the
simplest classification of ankle fractures and divides ankle fractures based on the level of the
fibular fracture relative to the syndesmosis.
Weber A is a distal fibular fracture with an intact syndesmosis. Usually treated conservatively.
Weber B is a fibular fracture at the level of the ankle joint, with indeterminate status of the syndesmosis.
Although by far the most common, this is the least useful classification because the status of the
syndsmosis is unclear. Treatment depends on stability of the syndesmosis.
Weber Cis a high fibular fracture above the level of the syndesmosis, with functional deficiency of the
syndesmosis. Usually treated surgically.
The Lauge-Hansen classification divides ankle fractures based on the position of the foot
at the time of injury, and the direction of the force acting on the talus. At first glance it is
a complicated system, but approximately 90% of ankle fractures are supination-external
rotation (SER) pattern, SO it makes sense to focus on this pattern of injury, as discussed on
the following page.
MSK: 1007