Inversion recovery (IR; continued)
Double IR is used with fast SE sequence as a dark-blood technique where blood appears
dark compared to myocardium.
Triple IR is a dark-blood technique with an additional IR pulse for fat suppression.
Double IR T1
Double IR T2
Triple IR T2
Lipomatous hypertrophy of thei interatrial septum (yellow arrows) on double and triple IR sequences: Note
suppression of fat in the interatrial septum and lateral chest wall (red arrow) on triple IR compared to double
IR. There is incomplete fat suppression anterior to the heart on the triple IR T2-weighted image.
Phase-sensitive inversion recovery (PSIR) is a version of IR that acquires a reference phase
image in the next heartbeat after the magnitude image is acquired. The phase information
is used to calculate the absolute differences in recovery of signal redistributed as grayscale
values. This allows for much greater separation between the normal myocardium and
abnormal myocardium along a wider range of inversion times based on gadolinium content
(i.e., pericardial effusion will be black on PSIR and bright on the magnitude image.)
Magnitude IR
Phase-sensitive IR
Dynamic first-pass perfusion MRI
First-pass contrast-enhanced perfusion MRI is performed pre- and post-vasodilator stress to
evaluate myocardial perfusion. Normal myocardium enhances homogeneously, while areas of
decreased perfusion will be relatively hypoenhancing. This technique allows for quantitative
perfusion. In characterization of cardiac masses, malignant masses generally have more avid
first pass perfusion while benign lesions have more mild or modest perfusion.
Delayed contrast-enhanced MRI
Delayed contrast-enhanced MRI (DE-MR) is performed using a T1W single inversion recovery
gradient echo or SSFP (if there is not enough signal typically at 1.5T).
Unlike in contrast-enhanced perfusion where first-pass enhancement is normal, any late
gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in DE-MR is abnormal and represents a delay in washout
of gadolinium-based contrast material from the extracellular space. Thus, any process that
expands the extracellular space (decreasing the ratio of normal myocytes to extracellular
space) will result in delayed enhancement.
LGE is caused by interstitial fibrosis due to cell death. It can also occur due to nonischemic
etiologies. Different patterns of enhancement suggest different etiologies.
Cardiac: 515