Calcium hydroxyapatite
Also called calcific tendinitis or calcific tendinopathy, calcium hydroxyapatite deposition
results from crystals being deposited in degenerating or hypoxic tendons, triggering an
inflammatory cascade.
Calcific tendinopathy is not associated with hypercalcemia, but it is seen more commonly in
diabetic patients.
On radiographs and CT, the mineralization of calcium hydroxyapatite appears amorphous
or globular. Importantly, there cannot be any cortication or internal trabeculation, either of
which would suggest bone formation by osteoblasts due to a different etiology from calcific
tendinopathy. If cortication or trabeculation were present then the differential diagnosis
could include intra-articular body, fragmented enthesophyte, or osteochondromatoss.
Calcific tendinopathy may erode through tendons and cause adjacent calcific bursitis. Rarely,
calcific tendinopathy may erode into bone (most commonly at the insertion of pectoralis
major at the anterior aspect of the proximal humerus) and simulate neoplasm with the
differential including parosteal sarcoma or myositis ossificans.
On ultrasound, calcium hydroxyapatite appears as globular hyperechoic shadowing foci.
On MR, the calcium hydroxyapatite deposits are low signal intensity on all pulse sequences,
often with surrounding edema/inflammatory change.
Ultrasound-guided barbotage is an effective treatment for calcific tendinopathy. In this
procedure, a larger-bore needle (18-20 gauge) is directed into the calcific deposit and
gently pulsed with a dilute anesthetic/saline solution to break up the deposit. Often, chalky
deposits are expelled retrograde into the body of the syringe with negative pressure on the
plunger.
The shoulder is by far the most common site in the body for calcific tendinopathy, with the
supraspinatus tendon the most commonly affected.
Grashey radiograph
Coronal T2-weighted MRI with fat supp.
Calcific tendinopathy of supraspinatus: Radiograph shows lobulated mineralization (arrow) just
cranial to the footprint of the greater tuberosity. Note the required absence of internal trabeculation
and peripheral cortication. MRI demonstrates that the globular low-signal mineralization (yellow
arrow) has eroded through the supraspinatus tendon and extends into the subacromial-subdetoid
bursa, where there is a moderate-sized bursal effusion (red arrow).
MSK: 926