Malignant coronary artery anomaly (continued)
Malignant: Anomalous origin of LEFT coronary
Malignant: Anomalous origin of RIGHT coronary
artery arising from the RIGHT coronary: sinus,
artery arising from the LEFT coronary: sinus,
passing between the aorta and the PA.
passing between the aorta and the PA.
pulmonary
pulmonary
artery (PA)
artery (PA)
aorta
aorta
right
right
left
left
non-
non-
coronary
coronary
RVOT
Malignant course of anomalous right coronary artery:
Sequential axial images from a coronary CTA show anomalous origin of the right coronary artery (arrow) from
the left coronary sinus, which then courses between the aorta and the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT).
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Anomalous interarterial course (between the pulmonary artery or RV outflow tract and the
aorta) of a coronary artery carries a high risk of sudden death of up to 40%, associated with
exercise. It is thought that dilation of the aorta occurs during exercise, which may compress
the anomalous vessel resulting in myocardial infarction.
Either an anomalous left coronary artery or anomalous right coronary artery may take a malignant
interarterial course.
Treatment is surgical bypass grafting.
Anomalous left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA) / Bland-White-Garland syndrome
Also called Bland-White-Garland syndrome, anomalous left coronary artery from the
pulmonary artery (ALCAPA) is a very rare but serious coronary artery anomaly, where the
left coronary artery arises from the pulmonary artery. Most affected patients are infants,
with over 90% mortality in the first year of life if untreated.
Treatment is surgical, with either direct implantation of the anomalous coronary artery (in
children) or ligation of the anomalous vessel in conjunction with bypass grafting (in adults).
Less commonly, the RCA may arise from the pulmonary artery. This is known as anomalous
right coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ARCAPA). Treatment is similar.
Cardiac: 510