Germ cell tumors (continued)
Extragonadal germ cell tumors are thought to be due to aberrant migration of totipotent
germ cells during early embryogenesis and occur in midline locations such as in the head,
mediastinum, and sacrococcygeal region.
Intracranial germ cell tumors have a peak incidence in the teenage years. Pineal region germ
cell tumors in particular have a male predominance.
Germinoma and teratoma are germ cell tumors that are the most common and second
most common pineal region tumors, respectively, and have good prognosis. Less common
and associated with poor prognosis are embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac (endodermal sinus)
tumor, choriocarcinoma, and mixed tumors.
Germinoma (extra-gonadal seminoma) is the most common intracranial germ cell tumor.
Germinoma is a highly cellular, avidly enhancing tumor that is slightly hyperdense on CT, isointense on T1-
and T2-weighted images, and is dark on ADC map. Germinoma characteristically "engulfs" the pineal gland
and promotes its calcification, resulting in central area of calcification.
Imaging of the entire neuraxis is recommended as leptomeningeal deposits can occur. Treatment is
radiotherapy, with excellent prognosis.
Pineal germinoma may present with a synchronous suprasellar germ cell tumor.
Teratoma is the second most common pineal region tumor and confers a worse prognosis
than germinoma. Teratoma has a heterogeneous imaging appearance.
Intralesional fat is suggestive of teratoma. Teratoma is prone to hemorrhage and coarse calcification.
Pineal parenchymal tumors
Pineal parenchymal tumor of intermediate differentiation: Axial noncontrast CT (left image) demonstrates a
hyperdense pineal mass. Post-contrast T1-weighted MRI (right image) shows the mass enhances. There is no
restricted diffusivity (not shown).
Pineal parenchymal tumors are a spectrum including pineocytoma (WHO grade 1), pineal
parenchymal tumor of intermediate differentiation and papillary tumor of the pineal region
(grade 2 or 3), and pineoblastoma (grade 4).
Pineoblastomas affect young children whereas the other pineal parenchymal tumors are
mostly seen in adults.
Pineoblastoma is an aggressive tumor that is histologically similar to other pediatric small
round blue cell tumors, medulloblastoma, and retinoblastoma.
The term trilateral retinoblastoma is used when there are retinoblastomas in both eyes and a
pineoblastoma (both the retina and pineal gland are light-sensing organs). The suprasellar region is
additionally involved in quadrilateral retinoblastoma.
Any solid component of a pineal parenchymal tumor should demonstrate enhancement.
Cystic change or necrosis is common, which can make it difficult to differentiate from a
pineal cyst.
Neuro Brain: 729