Bladder adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
of the bladder is
rare but it is usually
associated with an
urachal remnant.
The fetal urachus
extends from the
bladder dome to the
umbilicus. It should
be obliterated after
birth, but may
Urachal adenocarcinoma: Sagittal T2-weighted (left image) and sagittal
persist as a urachal postcontrast fat suppressed T1-weighted MRI (right image) shows an irregular, T2
anomaly (discussed hyperintense, avidly enhancing mass directly superior to the bladder (arrows). The
in the pediatric
mass connects to both the bladder and the umbilicus (not shown).
Imaging section).
Case courtesy Chery! Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
BLADDER TRAUMA
CT ystography/poystogram is the standard test to evaluate for suspected bladder rupture.
Full distension of the bladder is needed to evaluate for bladder rupture. Delayed imaging of
an intravenous contrast study with opacification of excreted urine is not sensitive enough, as
it does not adequately distend the bladder, and is not the standard of care.
To perform a CT cystogram, a total volume of at least 300 mL (or as much as the patient can
tolerate) of dilute water-soluble contrast (50 mL of IV contrast mixed in 500 mL of warm
saline) is instilled into the bladder by gravity, with the bag raised 40 cm above the bladder.
Male patients with bladder injury may have associated urethral injury. If there is blood at
the urethral meatus or if there is gross hematuria, a retrograde urethrogram should be
performed prior to Foley catheter placement.
Bladder injury can be classified as extraperitoneal (most common), intraperitoneal, or
combined.
Extraperitoneal bladder rupture
Unenhanced CT (left image) shows fluid stranding within the retroperitoneum (yellow arrows). There is no
fluid between loops of bowel. CT cystogram (right image) shows the molar tooth sign of extravasated contrast
anteriori to and lateral to the bladder. There are few extra-luminal foci of gas (red arrows) within this extra-
peritoneal contrast collection. Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
GU: 274