VITAMIN-DEFICIENCY BONE DISEASE
Scurvy
Scurvy hypovitaminosis C) causes generalized osteopenia as osteoblasts require vitamin C
to form mature osteoid tissue.
Subperiosteal hemorrhage can be associated with periosteal reaction. Hemarthrosis, as well
as retrobulbar and intracranial bleeding are additional manifestations.
Pediatric signs of scurvy include the Wimberger ring sign, which is increased epiphyseal
sclerosis due to disorganized epiphyseal ossification, and a Pelkin's fracture, which is a
metaphyseal corner fracture.
A dense metaphyseal line (Frankel line) may be present due to provisional calcification, with
underlying lucent band (Trummerfeld zone).
Osteomalacia
Osteomalacia:
Frontal radiograph of the hip demonstrates an
incomplete linear lucency (arrow) through the medial
(weight-bearing) proximal femur, representing a Looser
zone.
Case courtesy Stacy. Smith, MD, Brigham and Women's
Hospital.
Osteomalacia is faulty mineralization of bone matrix caused by vitamin D deficiency. The
same process is called osteomalacia in adults and rickets in children. Rickets is discussed in
the pediatric imaging section.
Osteomalacia manifests as diffuse osteopenia; however, a Looser zone pseudofracture) is
highly specific. A Looser zone is a cortical stress fracture that is filled with abnormal, poorly
mineralized osteoid and appears as a radiolucency through the cortex. Common sites for
Looser. zones are the medial proximal femurs, distal scapulae, and pubic bones.
Osteomalacia may be complicated by insufficiency fracture.
ENDOCRINE BONE DISEASE
Acromegaly
Acromegaly is the syndrome caused by excess growth hormone. When the growth hormone
excess occurs when the physes are open, the bones will grow longitudinally, leading to
gigantism. However, when the hormone excess occurs once the physes have closed then
the bones cannot lengthen and instead obtain a characteristic appearance of acral (distal)
growth and widening.
In the head there is enlargement of frontal sinuses, thickening of cranial bones, and an
enlarged jaw.
In the hands, beak-like osteophytes of the metacarpal heads and spade-like overgrowth of
the distal phalanges are characteristic.
In the feet, a characteristic finding is increased heel-pad thickness.
MSK: 982