VISCERAL COMPARTMENT MEDIASTINAL MASS
Adenopathy
Lymphadenopathy is an important cause of a middle mediastinal mass on radiography,
etiologies of which include malignant and non-malignant causes.
Lymph node calcification, low attenuation, and avid enhancement are unusual features for
lymphoma. An alternative diagnosis should be considered if these imaging findings are seen.
Eggshell calcification of lymph nodes is often present in silicosis and coal worker's
pneumoconiosis, less commonly in sarcoidosis. Given the greater prevalence of sarcoidosis,
however, eggshell calcification may be seen more commonly in sarcoid overall.
Dense calcification within a lymph node can be seen in sarcoidosis or as a sequela of prior
granulomatous disease.
Low attenuation lymph nodes, while nonspecific, should raise concern for active TB. Low
attenuation lymph nodes can also be seen in fungal infection such as histoplasmosis,
lymphoma, and metastatic disease.
Hemorrhagic hign-attenuation lymph nodes can be seen in anthrax inhalation as part of
hemorrhagic lymphadenitis and mediastinitis.
Avid lymph node enhancement can be seen in Castleman disease, sarcoidosis, TB, and
vascular metastases. Avidly enhancing metastases include:
Renal cell carcinoma.
Sarcoma.
Thyroid carcinoma.
Melanoma.
Lung carcinoma.
Castleman disease
Castleman disease, also known as angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia, is a cause
of highly vascular thoracic lymph node enlargement. The key imaging feature is avidly
enhancing lymph nodes.
Unicentric Castleman disease is seen as a single enlarged lymph node in children or young
adults. Surgical resection is usually curative.
Multicentric Castleman disease is almost always seen in patients with AIDS associated with
HHV8. Multicentric disease often results in systemic illness including fever, anemia, and
lymphoma. It is typically treated with chemotherapy.
Epicardial fat pad
Epicardial fat infarct: Radiograph shows hazy opacity overlying the left heart border (arrow). Axial CT image
shows fat stranding and edema of the left epicardial fat pad in keeping with infarct.
A prominent epicardial fat pad silhouettes the cardiac border on a frontal radiograph and
may simulate cardiomegaly.
Chest: 77