Biliary leak
*!!r!r!
Bile leak: Sequential images (top row) and two enlarged still images (bottom two images) from a HIDA
scan with 5.4 mCi Tc-99m disofenin administered to a patient with right upper quadrant pain status post
cholecystectomy. shows tracer accumulating in the gallbladder fossa (yellow arrow) and pooling in the right
paracolic gutter (blue arrow). The gallbladder is surgically absent. The leak was thought to arise from the cystic
duct stump.
A HIDA scan is an accurate method to assess for the presence of a biliary leak. Imaging can
be performed in the right lateral decubitus position to promote dependent pooling of bile.
PULMONARY
RADIOTRACERS
Tc-99m MAA (perfusion)
Technetium-99m macro-aggregated albumin (MAA) is a particulate radiopharmaceutical
that lodges in the pulmonary capillary bed and can therefore be used to evaluate pulmonary
perfusion. Most particles are between 10-30 um in size.
Typically 3-5 mCi Tc-99m MAA are administered intravenously, comprising between 200,000
and 600,000 particles. Particles begin to break down in approximately 30 minutes. In
children, pregnant patients, patients with mild pulmonary hypertension, and patients with a
known right-to-left shunt, the dose can be halved to approximately 100,000 particles.
A relative contraindication to MAA is severe pulmonary hypertension, as obstruction of even
a few pulmonary capillaries can cause clinical worsening.
A right-to-left shunt causes immediate renal and brain uptake after intravenous injection. A
Tc-99m MAA study may be able to quantify the shunt fraction in these patients. Note that
renal uptake can also be seen if free pertechnetate is present, but evaluation of the head
and neck can differentiate free pertechnetate from a right-to-left shunt. Free pertechnetate
is taken up by the thyroid, but not the brain. A right-to-left shunt, in contrast, demonstrates
immediate brain uptake and no significant uptake in the neck.
Clumping of MAA can be seen when MAA is inadvertently drawn back into injection syringe,
causing coagulation with the patient's blood.
Nucs: 468