ENHANCEMENT KINETICS
early I delayed
(type D
e
persistent
E
plateau (type II)
I
washout(type III)
Sow
2minutes
time
Tumor angiogenesis and resultant capillary permeability would be theoretically expected to
cause rapid enhancement and washout. This principle is the foundation for kinetic analysis
in dynamic contrast-enhanced breast MRI.
After repeated imaging of the breast at multiple time points (dynamic contrast-enhanced
sequence), enhancement curves can be generated by plotting percent relative enhancement
(compared to the unenhanced image) against time. The enhancement curve is divided into
early (within the first two minutes) and delayed phases.
Per the BI-RADS lexicon, the kinetics of early enhancement can be characterized as slow,
medium, and rapid. A malignant lesion would be expected to have rapid early enhancement.
Analysis of the delayed phase of enhancement allows one to further stratify the risk of
malignancy. The three kinetic patterns of delayed enhancement are: Persistent (type I),
plateau (type II), and washout (type III).
A type I (persistent) curve shows continuously increasing (>10%) enhancement in the
delayed phase. Although a type I curve is associated with a benign finding in 83% of cases,
up to 9% of malignant lesions may feature a type I curve.
A type II (plateau) curve has an early rise in enhancement, but levels off (within 10%) in the
delayed phase. A type II curve is suspicious, although less strongly SO than a type III curve.
Type II curves have been reported to have a positive predictive value between 64-77%.
Ai type III (washout) curve has a >10% decrease in signal intensity in the delayed phase and
is suspicious for malignancy. A type III curve has a positive predictive value of 87-92%, but is
seen in only 21% of malignant lesions. False positive benign lesions that may show washout
kinetics include lymph nodes, adenosis, and papillomas.
Ini the evaluation of a lesion, morphology is much more important than the pattern of
enhancement. If a mass with malignant morphology (e.g., spiculated margins or rim
enhancement) demonstrates type I enhancement, it remains just as suspicious for cancer.
Similarly, a small, circumscribed, reniform mass adjacent to a vessel with type III kinetics is a
typical appearance for a benign intramammary lymph node and should not be biopsied.
Breast: 410