Stress fracture
A: stress fracture represents a fracture due to abnormal stress in a normal bone.
Common sites of stress fractures include the tibial diaphysis, the femoral neck, and the
metatarsals. Metatarsal stress fractures are the most common stress injury in the foot/
ankle, with 90% occurring in the second or third metatarsals.
The bone scan is typically positive by the time the patient has pain. A stress fracture is
positive on all three phases of the bone scan.
Shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome)
Shin splints cause pain from periostitis at
Anterior projection Tc-99m
MDP bone scan (25 mCi
the tibial insertions of the anterior tibialis
administered) shows linear
and soleus muscles.
uptake along the anterior
A three-phase bone scan shows normal
cortex of the right tibia
blood flow and blood pool images, with
(arrow), consistent with shin
splint. Degenerative-type
linearly increased uptake in the tibia on
uptake is seen at both knees.
delayed (skeletal) phase.
Insufficiency fracture
An insufficiency fracture represents a fracture in response to normal stress in an abnormal
bone due to underlying osteoporosis.
A sacral insufficiency fracture typically shows "H"-shaped uptake in the sacrum, often
referred to as the Honda sign.
Insufficiency fracture of the knee is a cause of atraumatic knee pain in the elderly. It typically
appears as intense uptake in the medial femoral condyle. This condition was previously
called spontaneous osteonecrosis of the knee (SONK) but has seen been discredited as it is
insufficiency rather than osteonecrosis.
Anterior and posterior projections from a Tc-99m MDP bone scan (25 mCi administered) show uptake in the
sacrum with a H-shaped configuration, representing the Honda sign of sacral insufficiency fracture.
Prosthesis evaluation
Evaluation of a painful hip or knee prosthesis for loosening or infection is a common
indication for a bone scan.
In a cemented prosthesis, it is normal to see activity surrounding the prosthesis up to 12
months. In a non-cemented prosthesis, activity may remain increased up to two years as
bony ingrowth continues.
In evaluation of a hip prosthesis, focal activity at the lesser trochanter (which acts as a
fulcrum site) and distal femoral prosthetic tip seen >1 year for cemented or >2 years for
non-cemented prosthesis suggests loosening. In contrast, generalized increase in radiotracer
activity surrounding the prosthesis may suggest osteomyelitis.
Mild to moderate activity that is limited to the greater trochanter/intertrochanteric region is
often due to heterotopic ossification.
Nucs: 474