Metastases
Metastases to the parotid nodes (both within the gland and surrounding it) most commonly
occur from cutaneous malignancies on the lateral side of the head, usually squamous cell
carcinoma.
On imaging, a round parotid mass larger than 6 mm, sometimes with central necrosis or ill-
defined margins, is suggestive of nodal metastasis in patients with a history of scalp or face
skin cancer or concurrent cervical nodal metastases from other primary tumors.
Lymphoma
Salivary gland lymphomas are rare. Most are non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphomas, particularly
extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated ymphoid tissue (MALT
lymphoma).
Sjogren syndrome is a strong risk factor, although most instances of salivary gland
lymphoma are not associated. Any new dominant parotid mass in the setting of Sjogren
syndrome should raise concern for lymphoma.
NFLAMMATORY SALIVARY DISEASE
Sialadenitis and sialolithiasis
Sialolithiasis (stones within salivary ducts or glands) is the most common cause of acute
unifocal sialadenitis, due to obstruction of the drainage and resultant gland inflammation.
The vast majority of salivary calculi and, in turn, cases of sialadenitis, occur in the
submandibular gland and duct, due to its relatively viscous secretions and uphill drainage
course.
Suppurative (acute bacterial) sialadenitis can occur without sialolithiasis, predominantly
involving the parotid gland in elderly patients, often in the setting of recent surgery,
intubation, dehydration, or poor oral hygiene.
The most common causes of multifoca/bilateral sialadenitis in children are juvenile
recurrent parotitis (chronic parotitis) and mumps viral parotitis.
lodine-related sialadenopathy
Radioiodine sialadenitis is a common, dose-dependent side effect of iodine-131 therapy
for thyroid cancer. Patients have transient salivary gland swelling and pain with decreased
salivary flow.
lodide sialadenitis, also known as iodide mumps, is a rare, idiosyncratic, non-allergic
adverse reaction to iodinated contrast media administration. Patients have self-limited
painless salivary gland swelling minutes to days after contrast-enhanced CT or angiography.
HIV-related benign lymphoepithelial lesions
HIVI lymphoepithelial lesions:
Axial contrast-enhanced CT
through the parotid glands
shows numerous peripherally
enhancing cystic lesions
bilaterally (arrows).
Case courtesy Mary Beth
Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts
Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Neuro Head & Neck: 792