Retroperitoneal hematoma
Retroperitoneal hematoma with active extravasation: Axial contrast-enhanced CT (left image) shows a
heterogeneous isodense mass in the left paravertebral region indistinct from the left psoas, with anterior
extension along the left perirenal space. A punctate hyperdensity (yellow arrow) is seen within the mass which
demonstrates blush on delayed phase (right image; yellow arrow), representing active extravasation. Also seen
is a subtle fluid-fluid level (hematocrit effect; red arrow). This patient was on anticoagulation.
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage can occur in the setting of trauma, ruptured abdominal aortic
aneurysm, renal masses (e.g., renal angiomyolipoma or hemorrhagic renal cyst), or as
complication of femoral vascular access. Spontaneous retroperitoneal hemorrhage can
occur in patients who are anticoagulated.
Coronal T2-weighted MRI
Coronal post-contrast T1-weighted MRI with fat supp.
Retroperitoneal hematoma due to ruptured
hemorrhagic renal cyst: There is a complex cystic mass
of the right upper pole (yellow arrows), with internal
foci of hyperintense signal on T1-weighted images
(red arrows), in keeping with blood products. There
is a large retroperitoneal hematoma inferior to the
right kidney (blue arrows) with foci of blood products
(green arrows). Careful comparison of the pre- and
post-contrast images and subtraction images (not
shown) showed no enhancement. It is important not
to confuse the regions of T1 shortening (bright signal)
with active extravasation; such regions are due to
Axial pre-contrast T1-weighted MRI with fat supp.
methemoglobin in evolving blood products.
Retroperitoneal bleeds may explain acute anemia in patients without an identifiable source
of bleeding on physical exam.
To assess for retroperitoneal bleed, noncontrast CT is a reasonable choice as an initial study
to more rapidly image the patient. However, intravenous contrast can be helpful to diagnose
active extravasation, especially if a large retroperitoneal hematoma is clinically suspected.
GU: 232