SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE AND ANEURYSMS
SUBARACHNOID HEMORRHAGE (SAH)
ACA
MCA
ICA
Subarachnoid hemorrhage: Noncontrast CT (left image) shows diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage (arrows)
in the basal cisterns including the suprasellar cistern, the anterior interhemispheric fissure, and the Sylvian
fissure, predominantly on the right. Frontal oblique digital subtraction cerebral angiogram (right image) of the
right internal carotid artery shows a small saccular aneurysm at the MCA trifurcation (yellow arrow).
Overall, the most common cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is trauma. Aneurysm
rupture is by far the most common cause of non-traumatic SAH. No cause of the SAH is
identified in up to 22% of cases.
Clinically, non-traumatic SAH presents with thunderclap headache and meningismus.
Noncontrast CT is the initial imaging modality in suspected SAH. On CT, subarachnoid blood
appears as high attenuation within the subarachnoid space.
High attenuation material in the subarachnoid space may be due to SAH (by far the most common
cause), meningitis, leptomeningeal metastases, or prior intrathecal contrast administration.
Noncontrast CT is >95% sensitive for detecting SAH within the first 6 hours, with sensitivity
slowly decreasing to 50% by day 5. If clinical suspicion for SAH is high with a negative CT
scan, the standard of care is to perform a lumbar puncture to look for xanthochromia.
If SAH is present on imaging or lumbar puncture shows xanthochromia, catheter
angiography is the gold standard to evaluate for the presence of an aneurysm. Several
recent studies have shown, however, that CT angiography is equivalent to catheter
angiography in the search for a culprit aneurysm in cases of SAH.
On MRI, acute SAH appears hyperintense on FLAIR and demonstrates susceptibility artifact
on gradient sequences.
The differential diagnosis for increased FLAIR signal in the subarachnoid space is similar to the differential
for high attenuation subarachnoid material seen on CT, including SAH, meningitis, leptomeningeal
metastases, and residual contrast material. Note that meningitis and metastases will typically show
leptomeningeal enhancement in addition to the abnormal FLAIR: signal.
Recent oxygen or propofol administration will also cause increased subarachnoid FLAIR signal.
Neuro Brain: 679