Thoracentesis
One of the most common procedures in IR, thoracentesis typically involves ultrasound-
guided removal of fluid through a valved 7-French catheter.
When deciding the intercostal approach, choose the level with the most fluid, ideally with
fluid above and below the level of entry to allow for margin of error as the lung moves
during respiration.
Pre-procedure ultrasound imaging can demonstrate high viscosity, septations, or clot for
which a larger bore needle may be needed. The needle should enter the intercostal space
just above the rib, to avoid the neurovascular bundle coursing along the inferior margin.
No more than 1 liter should be removed in 24 hours to avoid re-expansion pulmonary
edema.
Upon removing the needle, gauze saturated with petroleum jelly should be applied to the
entry wound.
Paracentesis
Paracentesis for ascites is usually performed in the lower quadrants. Care should be taken
to mark or observe the epigastric vessels under ultrasound. Visualization of the needle tip
during entry is important to avoid viscus perforation.
Typically, up to 5 liters can be removed before it is necessary to replenish serum albumin.
ENTERIC ACCESS
Percutaneous gastrostomy indications
Esophageal, head and neck, and neurologic disease may necessitate percutaneous
gastrostomy. Of note, there is strong evidence that gastrostomy does not improve survival or
quality of life in elderly patients with dementia and decreased oral intake.
A less common indication for gastrostomy is for long-term bowel decompression, for
instance due to palliation of malignant bowel obstruction or prolonged ileus.
Percutaneous gastrostomy technique
Absolute contraindications to percutaneous gastrostomy include lack of appropriate window
(such as colonic interposition), extensive gastric varices, and uncorrectable coagulopathy.
A nasogastric tube is inserted under fluoroscopic guidance, through which the stomach is
insufflated with air.
Under fluoroscopic guidance, three T-fastener gastropexy clips are deployed to pexy the
anterior wall of the stomach to the anterior abdominal wall. After each deployed T-fastener,
intra-gastric position is confirmed with a small amount of contrast injected into the stomach.
After the pexy clips are in place and the stomach is firmly fastened against the anterior
abdominal wall, the definitive gastrostomy puncture is made and serially dilated. The
gastrostomy can be used in 24 hours after the patient is evaluated for peritoneal signs.
The gastrostomy tube must remain in place for at least a month to form a mature
transperitoneal tract.
IR: 649