HIV infection is frequently associated with benign lymphoepithelial lesions, which are mixed
solid and cystic masses representing reactive ymphoid infiltration that causes proliferation
of ductal epithelium with cystic change.
Benign lymphoepithelial lesions almost always involve the parotid gland. They are
the most common parotid lesions in patients with HIV infection. Concurrent cervical
ymphadenopathy is an additional clue on imaging for HIV infection.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis occasionally involves the parotid glands with granulomatous inflammation,
typically presenting as bilateral painless gland swelling.
Heerfordt syndrome, or uveoparotid fever, is the rare but pathognomonic presentation of
sarcoidosis as bilateral uveitis, parotitis, and facial nerve palsy.
The panda sign of sarcoidosis is the finding on the obsolete gallium-67 scan of radiotracer
uptake in bilateral lacrimal and parotid glands, superimposed on physiologic nasopharyngeal
uptake.
Sjogren syndrome
Sjogren syndrome: Coronal post-contrast T1-weighted (left image) and axial T2-weighted MRI with fat
suppression shows numerous small, T2 hyperintense lesions in the left parotid (arrows), which demonstrate
minimal peripheral enhancement.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Sjogren syndrome is an autoimmune disorder affecting the salivary and lacrimal glands.
The typical patient is a middle-aged female. The disorder can be either primary or secondary
to another autoimmune disorder (most commonly rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus
erythematosus).
MRI shows a salt-and-pepper or honeycomb appearance of bilateral parotid glands: multiple
areas of high signal intensity mixed with discrete areas of low signal intensity on both T1-
and T2-weighted images, which represent a combination of benign lymphoepithelial lesions
(also known as ymphoepithelial sialadenitis) with fibrosis, punctate calcifications, and fatty
infiltration.
IgG4-related disease
IgG4-related disease is a multisystem fbroinflammatory disorder, which can involve the
submandibular and, less often, parotid glands.
Mikulicz syndrome refers to diffuse IgG4-related chronic sclerosing sialadenitis and
dacryoadenitis.
Kuttner tumor is a term for focal IgG4-related chronic sclerosing sialadenitis involving the
submandibular gland.
Neuro Head & Neck: 793