Central neurocytoma (continued)
Central neurocytoma is a WHO grade 2 neuronal tumor that occurs in young adults.
The most common location is the anterior part of the lateral ventricle near the foramen of
Monro, sometimes extending into the third ventricle. Extraventricular neurocytomas are
rare.
Typical imaging findings are a heterogeneous, multicystic (bubbly or Swiss cheese
appearing), lobulated, moderately enhancing mass attached to the septum pellucidum.
Calcification is common.
Intraventricular meningioma
Intraventricular meningioma: Coronal T1-weighted (left image) and axial T2-weighted (right image) MRI shows
a T1 hypointense, T2 slightly hyperintense mass (arrows) in the atrium of the left ventricle.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Intraventricular meningioma appears as a solid mass, typically in the trigone of the lateral
ventricle. It tends to occur in older patients, similar to other meningiomas.
Intraventricular meningiomas are typically hypercellular and homogeneously enhance,
distinguishing them from other intraventricular neoplasms.
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA)
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA) is a benign (WHO grade 1) astrocytoma variant
that is associated with tuberous sclerosis complex. Other common intracranial findings in
tuberous sclerosis include subependyma. nodules (hamartomas), cortical/subcortical tubers,
and white matter radial bands.
SEGA classically is an enhancing, heterogeneous mass in the lateral ventricle near the
foramen of Monro.
SEGA is distinguished from subependymal nodules at the caudothalamic groove by serial
growth or size >1 cm.
Choroid plexus xanthogranuloma
Choroid plexus xanthogranuloma is the most common choroid plexus mass in adults. Also
known as degenerative choroid plexus cyst, they represent collections of cholesterol and
lipid-laden histiocytes.
They are usually located in the atria of the lateral ventricles.
On MRI, they are hyperintense on T2-weighted images, do not attenuate completely on
FLAIR, and restrict diffusion.
Neuro Brain: 722