Overview of functional ovarian cysts (continued)
The Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound (SRU) published a consensus in 2010 regarding
management of asymptomatic ovarian and adnexal cysts imaged at ultrasound, which was
updated in 2019.
Simple cysts do not confer any increased risk of ovarian cancer, presuming the cyst can be
completely visualized and reliably characterized.
Simple ovarian cysts should be followed if >7 cm in premenopausal women, or >5 cm in
postmenopausal women per updated 2019 SRU consensus criteria.
On follow-up exams, regardless of menopausal status:
A cyst stable in size for two years can be considered benign and no further imaging follow-up needed.
A cyst that decreases in size on follow-up (by >10-15%) in average linear dimension can be considered
benign and no further follow-up needed.
Physiologic simple cyst (in a premenopausal patient)
Cysts <3 cm do not need to be described in the report, and there is no need for follow-up.
Cysts >3 and <5 cm should be mentioned in the report and described as benign, with no
follow-up necessary.
Cysts >5 cm should be described.
If superior visualization and confidence AND <7 cm, no follow-up is needed.
If standard visualization or confidence OR >7 cm, follow-up should be performed in 2-6 or 6-12 months.
2-6 months: Early follow-up if proper characterization desired.
6-12 months: To assess growth.
Postmenopausal simple ovarian cyst
Cysts <1 cm are considered normal and do not need to be reported or followed.
Cysts >1 cm and <3 cm are almost certainly benign, but should be described to document.
No follow-up is needed.
Cysts >3 cm should be described.
If superior visualization and confidence AND <5 cm, no follow-up is needed.
If standard visualization or confidence OR >5 cm, follow-up should be performed in 3-6 or 6-12 months.
3-6 months: Early follow-up if proper characterization desired.
6-12 months: To assess growth.
Hemorrhagic cyst
In both pre- and post-menopausal women, hemorrhagic cysts >5 cm should undergo short-
term follow-up US (6-12 weeks) to ensure resolution. If it does not resolve, the diagnosis of
endometrioma is considered.
Cyst with indeterminate, but probably benign, characteristics
These include cysts with features that are suggestive, but not sufficient to allow a confident
diagnosis of hemorrhagic cyst, endometrioma, or dermoid.
In women of reproductive age or women in early menopause, follow-up US within 6-12
weeks is suggested for resolution of a lesion to confirm that it is a hemorrhagic cyst. If
unchanged, then continued follow-up is to be considered. If follow-up imaging does not
confirm an endometrioma or dermoid, surgical evaluation is recommended.
In post-menopausal women, surgical evaluation is considered.
GU: 317