Hemangioma (continued)
The classic ultrasound appearance is a circumscribed, homogeneously echogenic mass with
no flow on color Doppler. Posterior acoustic enhancement may be present. If a solitary,
classic-appearing hemangioma is seen on ultrasound and the patient has an otherwise
normal-appearing liver, normal LFTS, no known malignancy or risk factors for HCC, and is
asymptomatic, then no further workup is required.
A hypoechoic halo (target sign) should never be seen -1 this finding suggests malignancy. Ultrasound
appearance of hemangioma can be confusing in a patient with underlying fatty liver and may appear
relatively hypoechoic compared to the background of echogenic fatty liver.
Any heterogeneity or atypical ultrasound findings should prompt consideration of an alternative diagnosis
such as hyperechoic HCC or metastatic disease (even in the absence of a halo). In a patient with cirrhosis
or any known primary malignancy, further workup (MRI or CT) is usually warranted.
Cavernous hemangioma: Transverse ultrasound
Portal venous phase axial contrast-enhanced
through the right lobe of the liver demonstrates a
CT demonstrates al hypoattenuating lesion with
circumscribed slightly heterogeneous echogenic mass peripheral discontinuous nodular enhancement
(calipers) with mild posterior acoustic enhancement. (arrows), typical of a hemangioma.
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston.
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH)
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is a hamartoma consisting of disorganized liver tissue with
no malignant potential.
It is more common in women and is not associated with oral contraceptives.
FNH is called a stealth lesion because it resembles background liver parenchyma on all
modalities, except arterial phase imaging due to vascular supply.
Approximately 15% of FNH have a characteristic central scar consisting of biliary ductules
and venules which does not contain fibrotic tissue and therefore is not a true scar.
FNH does not have a capsule.
MRI with Eovist contrast is the most useful imaging modality to diagnose FNH. FNH typically
is isointense to liver on all MRI sequences, except it is arterially hyperenhancing and will
show retained Eovist enhancement iso- or hyper-intense relative to liver in the hepatobiliary
phase (20 minutes after contrast administration) due to the presence of hepatocytes and
biliary ductules. The central scar will show delayed enhancement with extracellular contrast
agents (such as Gadavist), but will not enhance with Eovist.
GI: 112