Pleural effusion
Pleural effusions are relatively common in lung cancer, which may be due to ymphatic
obstruction or pleural metastases.
A malignant effusion is the presence of malignant cells within the effusion. A malignant
effusion is an M1a lesion, which precludes curative resection. Not all effusions associated
with lung cancer are malignant effusions, SO cytologic evaluation is necessary.
STAGING OF LUNG CANCER
Overview of lung cancer staging
The eighth edition of the TNM system, published in 2018, is based on data collected on over
77,000 patients with lung cancer from 1999 to 2010.
The eighth edition re-categorizes tumor size by upstaging T-classifiers to reflect that survival
is inversely proportional to every centimeter increase in size until 7 cm; at this point, the
same prognosis as T4 disease is reached.
Extrathoracic metastases that were classified as M1b in the seventh edition are further
subcategorized into M1b Oligometastatic) and M1c (multiple metastases) in the eighth
edition, to better define oligometastasis, which has a better prognosis and may benefit from
more aggressive local therapy.
Treatment based on staging
For early stages up to IIB and sometimes IIIA, surgery is usually performed. Neoadjuvant or
adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy can be used.
Stage IIIB (N3 - contralateral or supraclavicular nodes; or T4/N2) is unresectable.
Stage IV disease is generally not treated surgically unless there is a solitary adrenal or brain
metastasis.
T (tumor)
T1: Tumor <3 cm surrounded by lung or visceral pleura.
Tla: Tumor: <1 cm; T1b: >1 and <2 cm; T1c: >2 and <3 cm
T2: Tumor >3 cm and <5 cm, or local invasion of the visceral pleura, or endobronchial
lesions.
T2a: >3 to <4 cm; T2b: >4 and <5 cm
T3: Tumor >5 to <7 cm, or local invasion of chest wall, pericardium, phrenic nerve, or
metastatic nodules in the same lobe
T4: >7 cm, or invasion of mediastinum, diaphragm, heart, great vessels, recurrent laryngeal
nerve, carina, trachea, esophagus, spine or separate tumor nodule in a different lobe in the
psilateral lung
N (nodes)
The color coding of the lymph nodes on the diagram on the following page represents the
nodal staging of lung cancer for an example left-sided mass:
Chest: 43