GALLBLADDER
Acute cholecystitis
Contrast-enhanced CT: shows diffuse gallbladder
HIDA: scan shows no gallbladder uptake, consistent
wall thickening (arrows). There are no radiopaque
with cystic duct obstruction.
gallstones.
Pre-procedural ultrasound confirms thickened
Postcholecystostomy opacification of the gallbladder
gallbladder wall, with numerous dependent
shows numerous gallbladder filling defects (red
echogenic gallstones (red arrows) not seen on CT.
arrows), representing multiple stones.
Acute calculous cholecystitis. Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital
Percutaneous gallbladder drainage cholecystostomy) is indicated for the treatment of acute
calculous or acalculous cholecystitis in patients who are not surgical candidates.
Cholecystotomy is a temporizing measure for treatment of calculous cholecystitis prior to
cholecystectomy, but it may cure acalculous cholecystitis without surgery.
Of note, cultures are negative in 40% of acute cholecystitis.
Similar to percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, prophylactic antibiotics are given.
The two percutaneous approaches to the gallbladder are transhepatic and transperitoneal.
Transhepatic (through the liver): In the transhepatic approach, a needle is inserted in the midaxillary line
(either intercostal or subcostal) and directed towards the bare area of the gallbladder fossa through the
liver under sonographic guidance. Transhepatic cholecystostomy has decreased risk of peritoneal bile leak,
but increases the risk of liver laceration. The transhepatic approach is more commonly performed.
Transperitoneal (avoiding the liver): In the transperitoneal approach, the needle is directed into the
gallbladder from a subcostal approach in the right anterior abdomen, beneath the liver margin. While
there is less risk of damaging the liver, a transperitoneal approach carries an increased risk of peritoneal
bile leak. Additionally, a transperitoneal approach necessitates penetration of the gallbladder fundus,
which is the most mobile portion.
The drainage tube must remain in place until the following criteria are met:
Patienti is clinically improved. There is a risk of sepsis ift the tube is removed prematurely.
Cystic duct and common bile duct are demonstrated to be patent on repeat cholangiogram.
At least 6 weeks have passed since placement (regardless of transhepatic or transperitoneal approach),
to allow a fibrous tract to develop extending from the gallbladder to the skin puncture. Transperitoneal
cholecystostomy has greater risk of incomplete tract formation and bile peritonitis following tube removal.
IR: 632