Subdural hematoma
A: subdural hematoma is a crescentic extra-axial collection of blood located beneath the
dura. Since it is underneath the dura, the hematoma can extend across the cranial sutures.
Subdural hematomas often extend along the surfaces of the falx cerebri and tentorium
cerebelli.
Subdural hematomas typically result from tearing of cerebral veins. Patients with atrophic
involutional changes are at increased risk of subdural hematoma with even minor trauma, as
the cerebral veins stretch to traverse the enlarged CSF spaces.
A particular danger is a subdural hematoma in a patient with a ventricular shunt because
the shunted ventricular system does not function as a natural tamponade.
An isodense subdural hematoma is isoattenuating to gray matter. This occurs in the subacute
phase approximately 1-3 weeks after the initial injury. Three important clues alerting to the
presence of an isodense subdural are increased mass effect, white matter buckling, and an
apparently thickened cortex.
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Intraventricular hemorrhage can occur due to tearing of subependymal veins or from direct
extension of subarachnoid or intraparenchymal hematoma.
Patients with intraventricular hemorrhage are at increased risk of developing
noncommunicating hydrocephalus due to ependymal scarring, which may obstruct the
cerebral aqueduct.
INTRA-AXIAL INJURY
Coup/contrecoup mechanism
The coup/contrecoup mechanism of brain trauma describes the propensity for brain to be
injured both at the initial site of impact and 180° opposite the impact site, due to secondary
impaction against the cranial vault.
Cortical contusion
A cortical contusion is caused by traumatic contact of the cortical surface of the brain
against the rough inner table of the skull. Contusions affect the gyral crests and can occur in
a coup or a contrecoup location.
A: subacute cortical contusion may demonstrate ring enhancement and should be
considered in the differential of a ring-enhancing lesion if there is a history of trauma.
Enhancement may continue into the chronic stage.
A chronic contusion appears as encephalomalacia on CT. MRI is more specific, showing
peripheral hemosiderin deposition as hypointense on T2-weighted images and blooming
artifact on gradient echo sequences.
Intraparenchymal hematoma
Traumatic intraparenchymal hematoma can occur in various locations, ranging from cortical
contusion to basal ganglia hemorrhage (due to shearing of lenticulostriate vessels).
Similar to a cortical contusion, a subacute intraparenchymal hematoma may show ring
enhancement.
Neuro Brain: 702