Inferior vena cava (IVC) filter placement (continued)
The preferred location of the IVC filter is immediately inferior to the lowest renal vein,
including any variant renal veins (circumaortic or retroaortic). Placement inferior to the
lowest renal vein prevents the anomalous vein from acting as a conduit for clot propagation.
Circumaortic left renal vein is an anatomic variant seen in 2-10% of the population, where the left renal
vein is composed of two separate components. One component passes anterior to the aorta (the normal
configuration) and a second retroaortic component passes posterior to the aorta to meet the IVC.
Retroaortic left renal vein is a slightly less common variant (seen in 2-7% of the population), where a
single renal vein passes posterior to the aorta. A retroaortic left renal vein usually joins the IVC more
inferiorly than the right renal vein.
RIGHT.
6I
I-
Retroaortic left renal vein: Initial digital subtraction inferior vena cavography (left image) shows the left
renal vein (yellow arrow) entering the IVC markedly inferior to the right renal vein (red arrow), indicating
that the left renal vein is likely retroaortic. Post-procedure radiograph shows the filter tip placed a few mm
inferior to the confluence of the left retroaortic renal vein, indicated by the ruler (top of the filter at 148;
retroaortic left renal vein at 152). Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Interruption of the IVC with azygous continuation is a rare anomaly where blood from the lower IVC flows
into the azygous and hemiazygous veins, into the thorax, and then into the right atrium. Interruption of
the IVC with azygous continuation is associated with polysplenia and congenital heart disease. It is caused
by embryologic failure of the right subcardinal vein to join the intrahepatic venous complex.
The presence of preexisting IVC thrombus may interfere with the positioning of IVC filter,
requiring higher than normal placement.
VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLIC DISEASE
Phlegmasia cerulea dolens (PCD)
PCD is a vascular emergency consisting of acute limb swelling, cyanosis and severe pain
that occurs due to complete thrombotic occlusion of venous drainage of a limb. PCD occurs
most often in the setting of malignancy, trauma, neparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) or
other prothrombotic state.
Massive limb swelling, hypertension in the capillary bed, and eventually ischemia and
gangrene can occur if untreated.
PCD requires anticoagulation with IV heparin and treatment with angioplasty, catheter-
directed thrombolysis, or surgical thrombectomy.
IR: 624