HEMATOLOGIC BONE DISEASE
Sickle cell disease
Sickle cell disease is an autosomal recessive defect in the beta-chain of hemoglobin. Red
cells are: sickle-shaped and cause microvascular occlusion. The three osseous manifestations
of sickle cell disease are bone infarcts, dramatically increased risk of osteomyelitis, and
marrow xpansion/ryperplasi.
Sickle cell bone infarcts: Infarcts and avascular necrosis are caused by microvascular
occlusion from the sickled red cells. Avascular necrosis of vertebral body endplates causes
the characteristic H-shaped or Lincoln-log vertebral bodies. Other common locations for
infarction include the femoral heads and the diaphyses and metaphyses of long bones.
H-shaped vertebral bodies:
Bilateral femoral head avascular necrosis: Frontal pelvic radiograph in
Lateral thoracic spine
a skeletally immature patient with sickle cell anemia shows marked
radiograph shows characteristic flattening and sclerosis of both femoral heads (arrows), representing
central endplate depressions of advanced (Ficat stage IV) avascular necrosis.
the vertebral bodies (arrows) The Ficat staging of avascular necrosis is subsequently discussed.
representing vertebral body
avascular necrosis.
In advanced sickle cell, patchy sclerosis from multiple bone infarctions may become nearly
confluent, producing diffusely sclerotic bones.
Sickle cell dactylitis (also called hand-foot syndrome) is a special consideration in very young
children who have persistent hematopoietic marrow in the digits of the hands and feet.
Microvascular occlusion exacerbated by cold temperature causes dactylitis, which is evident
on radiographs as soft-tissue swelling and periosteal reaction.
Sickle cell osteomyelitis: Patients with sickle cell have an approximately 100x increased risk
of osteomyelitis, most frequently with Salmonella species.
Sickle cell marrow expansion: The radiographic findings of marrow expansion are more
pronounced in thalassemia, but similar findings can be seen in sickle cell.
MRI of the bone marrow shows diffusely low signal on T1-weighted images, reflecting diffuse red (cellular)
marrow.
Ini the long bones, chronic stimulation of red cell production causes widening of the medullary spaces and
coarsening of the trabeculae, which results in osteopenia and increased risk of insufficiency fracture.
In the skull, marrow expansion can cause hair-on-end striations and widening of the medullary cavity.
Involvement of the facial bones and extramedullary hematopoiesis are seen more commonly in
thalassemia.
MSK: 988