MALIGNANT MYOMETRIAL PATHOLOGY
Leiomyosarcoma
Uterine leiomyosarcoma is very rare and may arise de-novo or from malignant degeneration
of a fibroid.
A "funny looking fibroid" is much more likely to be a benign inhomogeneous fibroid rather
than a eiomyosarcoma, but rapid growth should raise suspicion.
Although signal heterogeneity, restricted diffusion, internal hemorrhage, and ill-defined
contour have been described in eiomyosarcomas, imaging cannot reliably differentiate
between leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma. In the absence of obvious malignant features
(such as local invasion or regional metastases), an unusual-looking fibroid is overwhelmingly
likely to represent a degenerating benign fibroid rather than a eiomyosarcoma.
Tamoxifen increases the risk of leiomyosarcoma in addition to endometrial carcinoma.
CONGENITAL UTERINE MALFORMATIONS
Uterine malformations are caused by abnormal development of the paired Mullerian ducts,
which normally fuse during embryogenesis. A septate uterus is the most common congenital
abnormality, followed by bicornuate uterus.
These anomalies increase the risk of infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss because the
uterine cavity is abnormal in size (often small, multiple) or morphology.
Congenital uterine abnormalities are associated with urinary tract abnormalities such as
renal ectopia or agenesis.
The American Society of Reproductive Medicine classifies Mullerian duct anomalies. Class
lis uterine agenesis/hypoplasia; Class II is a unicornuate uterus, and classes III through VII
represent the anomalies discussed below.
Normal
The normal uterus is shaped like a pear.
uterus
The endometrial cavity changes with the menstrual
cycle.
The fundus of the endometrium should be smooth
without thickening or protrusion.
Arcuate
Small indentation of the fundal surface of the
uterus
endometrial cavity, with indentation depth <10 mm
(class VI)
and angle >90 degrees.
There is no division of the uterine horns and
external fundal contour is convex. This is considered
along a spectrum with septate uterus.
Usually incidental and asymptomatic, and rarely
associated with pregnancy loss, arcuate uterus is
often considered a normal variant rather than an
anomaly. Treatment is almost always conservative.
Septate
Failed
Two uterine cavities, divided by a fibrous or
uterus
resorption of
muscular septum (>15 mm indentation depth, angle
(class V)
inter-Millerian
<90 degrees). External fundal contour is convex.
septa
Most likely of all uterine anomalies to be implicated
in pregnancy loss since the fibrous septal tissue or
myometrium is relatively avascular.
Metroplasty (resection of the septum) can be
performed hysteroscopically if the septum is fibrous,
or transabdominally if the septum is muscular.
GU: 309