CHILD ABUSE / NON-ACCIDENTAL TRAUMA (NAT)
Overview of imaging for child abuse
If there is clinical or radiographic concern for child abuse, a complete skeletal survey using
high-resolution bone technique (for children under two years of age) should be performed,
including frontal views of all long bones, rib views with obliques, skull, pelvis, hands/feet,
and entire spine. The images are reviewed by the radiologist while the child is still in the
department.
Bone scintigraphy is more sensitive for posterior rib fractures, but has higher radiation dose
than radiography, is insensitive for skull fractures, and cannot evaluate fracture morphology
for age.
The age of fractures is estimated by the presence of callus formation. In general, a fracture is
less than two weeks old if there is no callus, and at least one week old if there is callus.
These estimates are rough guidelines. A younger child will form callus and heal more quickly.
The speed of healing is also altered in the setting of malnourishment, which sometimes accompanies
neglect and/or abuse.
Highly specific fractures (but not the most common fractures)
These fractures are highly specific for child abuse. If any of these fractures are seen,
immediate concern must be raised for child abuse.
Classic metaphyseal lesion (also called metaphyseal corner fracture or bucket handle
fracture) is highly specific for abuse, and is a circumferential fracture through the peripheral
spongiosa bone of the distal metaphysis, most commonly around the knee or ankle. A
classic metaphyseal lesion is thought to be due to violent shaking or forceful pulling.
The classic metaphyseal lesion typically heals quickly (within 10 days) without callus formation, SO
prompt radiography is essential for diagnosis.
Posterior rib fracture is also highly specific for abuse as a result of squeezing injury,
but may be very difficult to diagnose when acute. A repeat chest radiograph with bone
technique can be performed in the acute setting, or follow-up radiograph after one week to
view interval callus formation.
Unlike in adults, rib fractures are not typically seen after CPR in children. In the rare case of rib fractures
from CPR, fractures tend to be anterior and lateral, not posterior.
Scapula fracture.
Sternum fracture.
Spinous process fracture.
Suspicious fractures (but not highly specific)
These fractures should raise suspicion for child abuse, but are not highly specific.
More than one fracture.
Fractures that are discordant with the clinical history.
Digital fracture in infants.
Long bone fracture in non-ambulatory child.
Complex skull fractures that are depressed, multiple, bilateral or crossing sutures.
Nonspecific (but frequently seen)
These fractures are commonly seen, both in the setting of child abuse and accidental
trauma, but are not specific for child abuse when seen in isolation.
Linear skull fracture.
Long bone fracture in ambulatory child.
Peds: 1165