ANEURYSM MORPHOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY
Saccular aneurysm
Ophthalmic artery aneurysm: Sagittal projection left common carotid arteriogram (left image) demonstrates
a superiorly directed saccular aneurysm (yellow arrow) arising at the ostium of the ophthalmic artery (red
arrow). Right image shows a 3D reconstruction of the aneurysm.
A: saccular (also called berry) aneurysm is a focal outpouching of the arterial wall, most
commonly arising at a branch point in the circle of Willis, and has a characteristic rounded
shape. The aneurysm points in the direction of blood flow leading into the branch
point. Saccular aneurysms are seen almost exclusively in adults, with a slight female
predominance. Saccular aneurysms are caused by a combination of hemodynamic stress
and acquired degeneration of the vessel wall.
Saccular aneurysms can be classified as small (<1 cm), medium (>1 cm and <2.5 cm), and
giant (>2.5 cm). The larger the size, the greater the risk for rupture.
Giant aneurysms often present with mass effect, can mimic a mass (especially if partially
thrombosed) and can cause a cranial nerve palsy. The most common is an oculomotor nerve
palsy caused by a posterior communicating artery aneurysm.
Minute aneurysms which occur as a result of chronic hypertension occurring most
commonly in the basal ganglia are termed Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms.
Non-inherited risk factors for the development of saccular aneurysm include hypertension,
inflammatory vascular disease such as Takayasu or giant cell arteritis, and hemodynamic
stress from altered state of cerebral blood flow such as due to moyamoya (aneurysms occur
most commonly in the posterior circulation) or AVM.
Inherited diseases that predispose to aneurysm formation include connective tissue diseases
such as Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos, polycystic kidney disease, and neurofibromatosis type 1.
The aneurysm neck is the opening which connects the aneurysm to the parent vessel and
the aneurysm body is the aneurysm sac. The neck:body ratio affects treatment options.
Aneurysms with relatively small necks are, generally easier to treat endovascularly with
endovascular coils.
Neuro Brain: 683