CAROTID SPACE
Anatomy of the carotid space
carotid space
vagus nerve (X) (yellow circle)
ICA
carotid jugular
sheath vein
Other cranial nerves passing through the carotid space:
glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
spinal accessory nerve (XI)
hypoglossal nerve (XII)
The carotid space, or post-styloid parapharyngeal space, is an incomplete fascial ring
surrounding the carotid artery and jugular vein. The carotid space extends from the skull
base to the aortic arch.
The contents of the carotid space include the carotid artery, carotid body, jugular vein,
and several cranial nerves. The vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) is the only cranial nerve that
remains within the carotid space the entire way into the thorax. In contrast, cranial nerves
IX, XI and XII pass transiently through the carotid space. Though there are lymph nodes
surrounding the carotid space, there are no lymph nodes contained within it.
The pattern of displacement of vascular structures in the carotid space is the key to
generating a differential diagnosis for a carotid space mass.
Differential diagnosis of a carotid space mass
Paraganglioma
Paragangliomas that occur in the carotid space include
paraganglioma of the carotid body and paraganglioma
of the vagal nerve. These demonstrate imaging
characteristics similar to paragangliomas elsewhere in the
head and neck, described previously.
Paraganglioma of the carotid body (carotid body tumor or
glomus caroticum tumor) splays the external and internal
carotid arteries at the carotid bifurcation.
Paraganglioma of the vagal nerve (glomus vagale tumor)
displaces thei internal and external carotid arteries
anteromedially.
Schwannoma
Similar to glomus vagale tumor, schwannoma (also most
commonly of the vagus nerve) also displaces the carotid
arteries anteromedially. Schwannoma, however, is not
Carotid body tumor: Axial contrast-
nearly as vascular as paraganglioma and does not have
enhanced CT shows an avidly enhancing
internal flow voids.
mass (yellow arrows) surrounding and
Neurofibroma
splaying the right internal (red arrow) and
external carotid (blue arrow) arteries.
Neurofibromas are almost always associated with
neurofibromatosis type I. Neurofibroma and schwannoma Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD,
are indistinguishable by MRI.
Massachusetts. Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Neuro Head & Neck: 846