TUBERCULOSIS (TB)
Tuberculosis (TB), caused by Mycobacterlum tuberculosis, remains an important disease
despite remarkable progress in public health and antituberculous therapy over the past
century. Tuberculosis remains a significant problem in developing countries. In the United
States, TB is seen primarily in immigrant, institutionalized, and immunocompromised
individuals.
Initial exposure to TB can lead to two clinical outcomes:
1) Contained disease (90%) results in calcified granulomas and/or calcified hilar lymph nodes. In a patient
with normal immunity, the tuberculous bacilli are sequestered with a caseating granulomatous response.
2) Primary tuberculosis results when the host cannot contain the organism. Primary tuberculosis is seen
more commonly in children and immunocompromised patients.
Reactivation (post-primary) TB is reactivation of a previously latent infection.
Primary tuberculosis
Primary TB: Chest radiograph (left image) shows a vague right upper lung opacity (arrow). CT shows a patchy
opacification (arrow) in the lower portion of the right upper lobe with adjacent tree-in-bud nodularity. The
patient's sputum grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Primary TB represents infection from the first exposure to TB. Primary TB may involve the
pulmonary parenchyma, the airways, and the pleura. Primary TB often causes adenopathy.
As many as 15% of patients infected with primary TB have no radiographic changes and the
imaging appearance of primary TB is nonspecific.
The typical imaging manifestation of primary TB is lobar consolidation +/- pleural effusion
and ympnadenopathy, although not all of these need to be present. Primary TB may occur
in any lobe. Both primary and reactivation TB can also present as isolated pleural disease or
miliary disease, see next section on miliary TB.
Classic imaging findings are not always seen, but include:
Ghon focus: Initial focus of parenchymal infection, usually located in the upper part of the lower lobe or
the lower part of the upper lobe.
Ranke complex: Ghon focus and ymphadenopathy.
Cavitation is rare in primary TB, in contrast to reactivation TB.
Chest: 23