LINES, TUBES AND DRAINS
DIALYSIS ACCESS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arteriovenous fistula
A surgical fistula for dialysis access provides good long-term patency (85% at two years), but
requires several months to "mature" and about 30% of fistulas fail to mature. A fistula is
mature when the veins have enlarged sufficiently to allow the high flow rates for dialysis.
Once mature, a fistula can remain patent even with relatively low flow rates.
The two common fistula locations are:
Radial artery - cephalic vein at the wrist
Brachial artery - variable veins in the forearm
Common causes of late fistula failure include venous outflow stenosis and peri-anastomotic
venous stenosis.
Polyletraflvorellylene (PTFE) graft
A polyetrafluorethylene (PTFE) graft is a short bridge of synthetic graft material placed
surgically between an adjacent artery and vein. Grafts have only 50% patency at two years,
but are able to be used sooner than fistulas. Grafts require higher flow rates to remain
patent compared to fistulas.
Similar to a fistula, the most common cause of graft failure is a venous stenosis, either at the
venous anastomosis or outflow vein.
Clinical evaluation of surgical dialysis access
A pulsatile fistula with lack of thrill suggests venous outflow obstruction.
High access recirculation at dialysis suggests venous outflow stenosis.
Weak pulse and poor thrill suggests arterial inflow stenosis.
Complete absence of a pulse suggests arterial thrombosis.
A pulseless fistula suggests thrombosed fistula.
Venous stenosis of surgical dialysis access
Venous outflow stenoses are typically treated with angioplasty, often requiring high-
pressure or cutting balloons to dilate the fibrotic lesions.
The goal of the procedure is to restore a palpable thrill and pulse, or to restore the venous
to brachial artery pressure ratio to less than 0.4.
Thrombosis of surgical dialysis access
Both arteriovenous fistulas and PTFE grafts may become thrombosed. In general, PTFE grafts
are simpler to declot compared to fistulas as the thrombus is usually limited to the graft.
Thrombosis is often secondary to venous stenosis, which must be treated as well.
Either pharmacologic or mechanical thrombosis can be performed.
IR: 646