Hypothyroidism
In children, hypothyroidism causes a delay in skeletal and dental maturity.
Hypothyroidism may cause bullet-shaped vertebral bodies and Wormian bones in the skull.
Hypothyroidism is associated with slipped capital femoral epiphysis.
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism causes accelerated bony maturation in children. Thyroid acropachy is a
rare cause of diaphyseal periosteal reaction of multiple bones including the metacarpals,
metatarsals, and phalanges, seen in the setting of treated hyperthyroidism.
DIOPATHIC BONE DISEASE
Paget disease
Paget disease is a progressive disturbance of osteoclastic and osteoblastic regulation seen in
older adults. The cause of Paget disease is unknown, but paramyxovirus may be involved.
Symptoms of Paget disease include bone pain, osseous enlargement or bowing,
compression of cranial nerves, and high output cardiac failure. Weakened subchondral bone
commonly leads to osteoarthritis. Other complications of Paget disease include pathologic
fracture and malignant degeneration (most commonly osteosarcoma).
Paget disease affects the skull, spine, and pelvis most commonly, followed by the articular
ends of the femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus. Involvement of the ribs and
scapula can occur but is uncommon.
Three sequential phases are described, although there is often overlap between the phases
and the disease may not always progress through the three stages in order.
Phase I: Osteolytic phase is due to hyperactivated osteoclasts and resultant active bone resorption.
Phase I: Mixed lytic and sclerotic phase is continued bony resorption and new bone formation.
Phase III: Sclerotic phase is dominated byi increased bone density and sclerosis.
Chronic Paget disease shows thickening of cortex, coarse irregular trabecular pattern, and
expansion of bone. This appearance has been called a caricature of normal bone.
Paget of the skull: In the osteolytic phase (phase I), the typical appearance is a sharply
marginated geographic lytic region called osteoporosis circumscripta. In the mixed phase
(phase II), the classic appearance is the cotton wool skull which looks like an artist dabbed
paint on the skull with a piece of cotton.
Cotton wool skull in mixed-
phase Paget disease:
There are cloud-like regions of
patchy sclerosis throughout the
calvarium.
Note the thickened calvarial
cortex, which is a generalized
feature of Paget disease.
MSK: 985