Pneumoconioses
A pneumoconiosis is a lung disease secondary to inorganic dust inhalation. In contrast,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis is caused by organic dust inhalation.
Silicosis and coal workers pneumoconiosis (CWP) are the two most common
pneumoconioses. They have indistinguishable imaging findings even though they are due to
different inhaled dusts and have different histologic findings. Imaging features also overlap
with sarcoidosis.
Silicosis is due to inhalation of silica dust, which miners may be exposed to.
CWP is caused by inhalation of coal dust, which does not contain any silica.
The most characteristic finding of uncomplicated disease is multiple upper-lobe predominant
perilymphatic nodules.
Eggshell lymph node calcifications are commonly seen in silicosis, less commonly in CWP.
Silicosis or CWP can become complicated with large conglomerate masses or progressive massive fibrosis.
Silicosis complicated with progressive
massive fibrosis: CT demonstrates upper
lobe predominant fibrotic changes. There are
perilymphatic nodules (yellow arrows) and a
developing left upper lobe conglomerative mass
(red arrow).
Egg-shell calcified lymph nodes are present in the
mediastinum (blue arrows).
Both silicosis and CWP confer an increased risk of TB.
Caplan syndrome is seen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and either CWP or silicosis (more common
in CWP) and represents necrobiotic rheumatoid nodules superimposed on the smaller centrilobular and
subpleural nodules of the pneumoconiosis.
Asbestosis is lung disease caused by inhalation of asbestos fibers. End-stage asbestosis can
lead to pulmonary fibrosis with a UIP pathology.
Unlike the other inhalational lung diseases, asbestosis predominantly affects the lower lobes because the
asbestos particles are too large to be removed by the alveolar macrophages and lymphatic system.
The radiographic/CT appearance and distribution of advanced asbestosis may be indistinguishable from
IPF; however, an important clue seen in asbestosis is pleural thickening and plaques.
Even though pleural plaques (which may or may not be calcified) are due to asbestos exposure, they are
not a component of asbestosis, do not lead to fibrosis, and are usually asymptomatic.
Chest: 60