BREAST MRI
INTRODUCTION
Overview of clinical role of breast MRI
Breast MRI plays a complementary role to mammography in the evaluation of breast cancer.
Contrast-enhanced breast MRI features excellent soft tissue contrast and high sensitivity
for the detection of cancer. Although the distinction between normal or benign structures
and malignancy is often not apparent using standard T1- and T2-weighted sequences, the
addition of dynamic contrast enhancement greatly increases the accuracy for detection of
malignancy.
One of the greatest challenges facing the evolving field of breast MRI is the overlap in
imaging findings between benign and malignant lesions. Both tumors and benign lesions
may enhance and may exhibit similar morphologic characteristics. Strategies such as the
characterization of enhancement kinetic curves and development of a stringent BI-RADS
lexicon help to tackle this problem.
One relative weakness of MRI compared to mammography is the lack of sensitivity to microcalcifications.
While some larger calcifications can be detected as susceptibility artifact, mammography is superior to
MRI for detection of small calcifications.
In clinical use to evaluate for breast cancer, standard 1.5 or 3 Tesla breast MRI has been
shown to have very high negative predictive values and relatively low false positive rates.
Breast MRI technique
The risk stratification of an enhancing lesion involves separate evaluation of the lesion
morphology (including morphologic description of the enhancement pattern) and the
kinetic pattern of enhancement.
Breast MRI is performed with the patient prone using a dedicated breast coil. Imaging of
both breasts should be performed simultaneously unless the patient has had a previous
mastectomy. Bilateral imaging is very helpful to distinguish background parenchymal
enhancement from pathological enhancement.
Standard sequences include T1- and T2-weighted images, with and without fat saturation.
Essential to the breast MRI exam are the pre- and post-contrast images, which are typically
obtained using fat saturation. Dynamic enhanced images are obtained sequentially to
evaluate for enhancement over time.
Intraductal fluid may be hyperintense on T1-weighted images, complicating the evaluation
of enhancement. Post-processing is required to evaluate for true enhancement.
The simplest form of post-processing is subtraction, where the dynamic post-contrast
images are subtracted from the initial T1-weighted fat-saturated images.
The maximum-intensity projection (MIP) image is a useful post-processing tool based on
the subtraction images. A MIP highlights the brightest pixel along each parallel ray to create
a volumetric data set where the enhancement can easily be seen in three-dimensional
space.
Computer-aided detection (CAD) is a helpful adjunct for analysis of contrast-enhanced MRI
sequences. CAD allows creation of a color angiomap, assigning colors to different temporal
patterns of enhancement and allowing further characterization of a lesion to help determine
the level of suspicion for malignancy.
Breast: 403