Pachymeningeal (dural) enhancement (extra-axial)
Diffuse dural enhancement: Axial (left image) and coronal post-contrast T1-weighted (right image) MRI shows
diffuse dural enhancement (arrows). This was a case of intracranial hypotension.
The pachymeninges (pachy means thick = a "thick-skinned" elephant is a pachyderm) refers
to the dura mater, the thick and leather-like outermost covering of the brain.
In addition to surrounding the surface of the brain, the dura forms several reflections,
including the falx, tentorium, and cavernous sinus.
The dura does not have a blood-brain barrier. Although contrast molecules normally diffuse
into the dura on enhanced CT or MRI, dural enhancement is never visualized on CT and is
only visualized on MRI in pathologic situations.
Dural enhancement is not seen on CT because both the skull and adjacent enhancing dura appear white.
Enhancement of normal dura is not visible on MRI because MRI visualization of enhancement requires
both water protons and gadolinium. Although gadolinium is present in the dura, there are normally very
few water protons. However, dural pathology often causes dural edema, which provides enough water
protons to make the gadolinium visible. Therefore, dural enhancement on MRI is an indication of dural
edema rather than BBB breakdown.
Intracranial hypotension: Prolonged decrease in CSF pressure can lead to vasogenic edema
in the dura.
Intracranial hypotension clinically presents as a postural headache exacerbated by standing upright.
Etiology may be idiopathic or secondary to CSF leak whether spontaneous or iatrogenic.
Imaging shows smooth, linear dural enhancement, enlargement of the pituitary gland and dural venous
sinuses, and "sagging" of the cerebellar tonsils. There may also be subdural hemorrhage due to traction
effect on the cerebral veins.
Postoperative: Dural enhancement may be seen postoperatively.
Post lumbar puncture: Diffuse dural enhancement is occasionally seen (<5% of the time)
after routine lumbar puncture.
Meningeal neoplasm, such as meningioma, can produce a focal area of dural enhancement
called a dural tail, due to reactive changes in the dura. Metastatic disease to the dura, most
commonly breast cancer in a female and prostate cancer in a male, can cause irregular
dural enhancement.
Hypertrophic pachymeningitis: localized or diffuse dural thickening due to various causes,
including infectious (e.g., tuberculosis, fungal, syphilis), inflammatory (e.g., rheumatoid
arthritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis), sarcoidosis, or can be idiopathic.
Neuro Brain: 664