MULTICYSTIC RENAL DISEASE
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD)
ADPKD: Axial enhanced CT shows bilateral
enlarged kidneys with innumerable renal
cysts of mixed attenuation. The liver is also
enlarged and contains innumerable fluid-
attenuation cysts.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) features bilaterally enlarged kidneys
with multiple large renal cysts. Patients present with progressive renal failure in their third
to fourth decades. The kidneys are sometimes palpable from enlargement and patients may
display secondary hypertension and hematuria (nephrolithiasis VS. rupture of a renal cyst
into the collecting system). Approximately 70% of patients have multiple hepatic cysts and
15% of patients have saccular cerebral aneurysms.
ADPKD is responsible for 10% of patients on long-term dialysis.
On imaging, the kidneys are markedly enlarged and feature multiple cysts of varying
attenuation (or signal intensity on MRI) due to hemorrhage.
ADPKD is not known to increase the risk of renal cell carcinoma, though some authors
propose that there is a slightly increased risk. Renal cell carcinoma associated with ADPKD
tends to occur at a younger age and is more often bilateral, multifocal, and sarcomatoid.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD)
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) features enlarged kidneys with
innumerable tiny renal cysts. ARPKD is a diagnosis of infancy and has a poor prognosis. If the
child survives infancy, hepatic fibrosis usually develops.
ARPKD presents in utero as enlarged echogenic kidneys (the cysts are too small to be
individually resolved by ultrasound).
Acquired cystic kidney disease (due to end-stage kidney disease)
Patients on long-term dialysis often develop many small renal cysts superimposed upon
atrophic kidneys.
Dialysis-associated cystic renal disease portends an increased risk of renal cell carcinoma
(-2-3% prevalence, compared to 1/10,000 prevalence in the general population).
Localized cystic renal disease
This is characterized by benign, slowly progressive proliferation of cysts, typically within a
normal functioning kidney and asymptomatic. It is always unilateral, and usually affects only
part of the kidney. No imaging follow-up or treatment required.
GU: 260