Infantile hemangioma
Infantile hemangiomas, previously known as
capillary hemangiomas, are the most common
neoplasms of the head and neck, including
orbits, in infants.
Infantile hemangiomas are characterized
histologically by capillary-like vascular spaces
lined with GLUTl-expressing endothelium and
clinically by presenting weeks after birth (but
are not present at birth). The course features
proliferation during infancy followed by
spontaneous involution in childhood.
Infantile hemangiomas can be superficial
(cutaneous 'strawberry hemangioma"), deep
subcutaneous), or combined. Most orbital/
Cavernous hemangioma: Axial T1-weighted post-
periorbital infantile hemangiomas are entirely contrast MRI through the orbits demonstrates
or largely extraconal, usually centered in the
a wel-circumscribed, intraconal ovoid mass
(arrows) that demonstrates inhomogeneous,
anterior orbit or eyelid.
patchy enhancement.
Imaging shows a lobulated, intensely enhancing Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD,
mass. Internal septations and flow voids on MRI Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
are typical.
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors
Schwannomas and localized neurofibromas are benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors with
indistinguishable imaging appearances when they occur in the orbit. Schwannoma is more
common.
The most commonly affected nerves are the extraconal sensory branches of CN V. However,
involvement of intraconal nerves is also possible.
Nerve sheath tumors are solitary, circumscribed, ovoid masses that are hypointense
on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on T2-weighted images (sometimes with central
hypointensity, called the target sign), and contrast-ennancing.
Lacrimal gland tumors
The most common lacrimal gland neoplasm is lymphoma.
Like inflammatory disorders, lymphoma usually appears as diffuse gland enlargement that
molds to orbital structures like putty.
The most common lacrimal epithelial neoplasm is pleomorphic adenoma (benign mixed
tumor), while the most common epithelial malignancy is adenoid cystic carcinoma.
Epithelial lacrimal gland tumors are usually masses arising focally from the orbital lobe that
displace orbital structures like a marble (indenting the globe, distorting the extraocular
muscles, and remodeling or destroying orbital walls).
Epithelial lacrimal gland tumors are unilateral. Bilateral involvement would be more typical
of systemic inflammatory or ymphoproliferative disorders.
Neuro Head & Neck: 777