PEDIATRIC HIP
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH)
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is incongruent development of the femoral head-
acetabular relationship. An abnormally shallow acetabular angle results in uncovering of the
femoral head by the acetabulum. There is an increased incidence of DDH in breech births, SO
all breech births are typically screened by ultrasound.
DDH is more commonly seen with oligohydramnios, firstborn infants, girls, and positive family history.
Physical examination findings include limited range of motion, hip "click" or "clunk", gluteal
or thigh fold asymmetry, and unequal leg lengths.
Ultrasound is generally performed at or after 6 weeks of age. maging is delayed because of
the effects of perinatal maternal hormones on neonatal ligamentous laxity.
The alpha angle is the angle formed by the bony ilium and acetabular roof, obtained from the coronal
hip ultrasound. A normal alpha angle is greater than 60 degrees. The bony portion of the acetabular roof
should cover at least 50% of the cartilaginous femoral head. An alpha angle <60 degrees or <50% coverage
of the femoral head by acetabulum is abnormal, suggesting DDH.
hip dysplasia: same coronal image with different annotations
alpha angle <60 degrees, femoral head <50% covered by bony acetabulum
gluteal muscles
.-
cartilagenous
acetabulum
lateral
cartilagenous
medial
femoral head
dangle:
bony ilium
bony acetabulum labrum
After femoral head ossification (typically after 6 months of age) radiographs are performed.
On pelvic radiography, the ossified femoral head should normally sit in the inner lower quadrant formed
by the intersection of the Hilgenreiner and Perkins lines.
The acetabular angle (white), drawn through the acetabular roof and Hilgenreiner line, is typically under
30 degrees at birth, and decreases to about 20 degrees or less by age two years.
normal side
dysplastic side
Hilgenreiner line (horizontal)
drawn through triradiate cartilage
Perkins line perpendicular)
drawn through lateral acetabulum
perpendicular to Hilgenreiner line
Peds: 1166