PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Webs
Illustration demonstrating the
Chronict thrombus physiologic changes in pulmonary
hypertension.
A normal lung is on the left and
abnormal lung on the right.
Key findings include dilated
Dilated vessels
vessels with abrupt change in
caliber or abrupt cut-off. Chronic
eccentrically located pulmonary
thrombus may be seen along
the vessel walls. Webs, delicate
ribbonlike structures attached to
-Luminali irregularity
the vessel wall, are often seen in
the setting of chronic pulmonary
embolus. Mosaic perfusion of
the lung parenchyma is due to
heterogeneous perfusion.
Mosaic
perfusion
The term pulmonary hypertension encompasses both pulmonary arterial and pulmonary
venous hypertension. The term pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is generally reserved
for the WHO class 1 entities (primary pulmonary hypertension), discussed below.
Pulmonary hypertension is pulmonary arterial systolic pressure 225 mm Hg at rest or 230
mm Hg during exercise. Elevated pulmonary venous pressures are present when pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure (an approximation of pulmonary venous pressure) is 218 mm Hg.
Overview of pulmonary hypertension classification
There are a number of causes of pulmonary hypertension including chronic thromboembolic
disease, chronic respiratory disease, chronic heart disease, and idiopathic causes.
The World Health Organization (WHO) clinical classification, based on the 2018 World
Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension, describes 5 groups of pulmonary hypertension.
Group 1: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).
Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) may be idiopathic or familial.
Congenital left-to-right shunts, such as atrial septal defect (ASD) and ventricular: septal defect (VSD), may
cause PAH and shunt reversal (Eisenmenger syndrome).
Group 1: Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) and pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis (PCH).
PAHI may be caused by pulmonary venous or capillary involvement.
Group 2: Pulmonary venous hypertension.
Left-sided heart disease (left atrial, left ventricular, or mitral/aortic valve disease may cause elevated
pulmonary venous pressure in chronic disease).
Group 3: Pulmonary hypertension associated with chronic hypoxemia.
COPD, interstitial lung disease, and sleep apnea can cause pulmonary hypertension in chronic disease.
Group 4: Pulmonary hypertension due to chronic thromboembolic disease.
Group 5: Pulmonary hypertension due to miscellaneous disorders.
Sarcoidosis is a rare cause of pulmonary hypertension.
Compression of pulmonary vessels, which can be due to neoplasm, fibrosing mediastinitis, etc., may cause
pulmonary hypertension.
Chest: 50