IMAGING OF THE LIVER
Liver CT
A "routine" contrast-enhanced abdominal CT is acquired in the portal venous phase of
enhancement, obtained 70 seconds following intravenous contrast administration.
In the portal venous phase, the portal veins should be fully opacified and contrast should
also be seen in the hepatic veins. The liver should be homogeneously enhancing, allowing
detection of attenuation alterations and/or morphologic changes of diffuse liver disease,
such as hepatic steatosis and cirrhosis. As most metastatic tumors are not hypervascular
(with a few notable exceptions, which will be subsequently discussed), liver metastases can
also generally be detected on the portal venous phase as hypoattenuating masses. Of note,
some breast cancers may rarely be soattenuating on the portal venous phase and may be
more conspicuous on unenhanced CT.
Most benign and malignant primary liver masses are hypervascular and thus are most
conspicuous in the late arterial phase of enhancement ("45 seconds). If the patient has
a known hypervascular primary malignancy, both a late arterial phase and portal venous
phase may be obtained for metastatic workup and restaging. If the patient has a suspected
primary liver mass (such as hemangioma, focal nodular hyperplasia, hepatocellular
carcinoma), a multiphase CT or MRI may be obtained, usually including a noncontrast,
arterial phase, portal venous phase and delayed phase.
Liver MRI
Compared to CT, MRI of the liver has superior lesion-to-liver contrast.
MRI also does not impart ionizing radiation, allowing for dynamic post-contrast imaging
in multiple phases without any penalty in radiation exposure to the patient. In- and out-
of-phase gradient imaging allows for detection of intracytoplasmic lipid, which is seen in
hepatic steatosis and may be seen within certain masses, including hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) and adenomas. Diffusion-weighted imaging is useful for detection of metastatic
lesions.
MRI Contrast agents:
Extracellular agents pass through the intravascular system and interstitium similarly to CT contrast.
Gadobutrol (Gadavist) is a commonly used extracellular contrast agent that is 90% excreted through the
renal system.
Combined cataceluar/hepatoallary agents pass through the intravascular system and interstitium
similarly to CT contrast, but are partially excreted through the biliary system. Gadoxetic acid disodium
(Eovist) is 50% excreted through the biliary system and 50% through the renal system. Indications for use
include evaluation for metastatic lesions and focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH).
Hepatobiliary Mechanism
Indications
Contrast Agent
Differentiating FNH and adenoma
Gadolinium- Gadoxetic
Taken up by liver in the delayed (FNH is iso to hyperintense)
based,
acid disodium phase
Hepatic metastases (uptake excludes
combined
(Eovist)
50% biliary excretion
a metastasis from nonliver primary)
extracellular/
hepatobiliary Gadobenate
Only 5% taken up by the liver, Now mainly used in pelvic, cardiac
agents
dimeglumine requires 1 hour delay
and MSK imaging
(MultiHance)
Iron oxide-
Ferumoxides or Particles trapped by Kupffer cells
based
and reduce T2 relaxivity, making Adjunct for detection of HCC
ferumoxytol
liver or spleen dark on T2
G!: 98