Diabetic striatopathy
Diabetic striatopathy, also known as yperglycemia-induced hemichorea-hemiballismus, is
a condition clinically manifest by involuntary, non-patterned movements.
It is most frequently seen in type 2 diabetic patients and is a complication of nonketotic
hyperglycemia.
Imaging findings are pathognomonic, characterized by unilateral hyperintensity of the
striatum on T1-weighted imaging and corresponding hyperdensity on CT.
The clinical and imaging findings are reversible in most patients.
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE)
caudate
putamen
globus pallidus
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy: Axial FLAIR (left image) shows symmetrical T2 prolongation in the bilateral
putamina, heads of the caudate nuclei, and to a lesser extent in the globi pallidi. There is subtle FLAIR
hyperintensity of the entire cortical ribbon. DWI (right image) shows marked DWI hyperintensity within the
globi pallidi (arrows).
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) in adults is caused by circulatory or respiratory
failure, leading to global hypoxia/anoxia.
Severe HIE typically affects the gray matter, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampi, and
basal ganglia. This distribution is similar to that of severe hypoglycemia. Involvement of the
basal ganglia portends a worse prognosis.
MR imaging shows FLAIR and/or DWI hyperintensity of the affected regions.
On CT, there is loss of gray-white differentiation, diffuse cerebral hypoattenuation, and sulcal
effacement. The white cerebellum sign describes the typical sparing of the cerebellum,
which appears relatively hyperattenuating compared to the affected supratentorial brain.
Methanol poisoning
Methanol poisoning causes severe metabolic acidosis. Patients present with visual and
gastrointestinal symptoms with rapid progression to a comatose state.
Selective hemorrhagic necrosis of the putamina with relative sparing of the globi pallidi
is the most characteristic imaging feature. Variable degrees of subcortical white matter,
cerebellum, optic nerve necrosis may also be seen.
Restricted diffusion can be seen in the acute phase. MR spectroscopy shows reduced NAA
and elevated lactate peaks.
Neuro Brain: 740