Other benign lesions/masses of the masticator space
Second branchial cleft cyst- a- -
Second branchial cleft cyst: Coronal (left image) and axial contrast-enhanced CT shows a water-attenuation
cystic lesion (yellow arrows) at the angle of the left mandible with minimal peripheral wall enhancement. This
cyst is in the classic location of a second branchial cleft cyst: Posterior to the submandibular gland (red arrow),
anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle (blue arrow), and closely associated with the carotid sheath.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Al branchial cleft cyst is a congenital anomaly arising from the embryologic branchial
apparatus. There are 4 types of congenital branchial cleft cysts, with the second type being
the most common type.
A second branchial cleft cyst may occur at any point along the path extending from the
palatine tonsil to the supraclavicular region, but occurs most commonly near the angle of
the mandible.
The classic second branchial cleft cyst displaces the sternocleidomastoid muscle posteriorly,
displaces the carotid artery and internal jugular vein medially and the submandibular gland
anteriorly.
The cyst may become superinfected, suggested by wall enhancement and adjacent
inflammatory changes within the surrounding soft tissues.
Although second branchial cleft cysts are frequently in the posterior submandibular space, an infected
second branchial cleft cyst would not typically be confused with a submandibular abscess. Submandibular
abscess is usually due to dental disease, typically located immediately inferior to the mandible.
Branchial cleft cysts are uncommon in older adults. A cystic metastasis (e.g., from papillary
thyroid cancer or base of tongue/tonsillar SCC) should be considered instead, especially if
the cyst is irregular or has a mural nodule.
On imaging, there is opacification of the middle ear and mastoid air cells, often with bony
erosion of the mastoid.
Neuro Head & Neck: 852