Hepatocellular carcinoma (continued)
LI-RADS is an imaging reporting and classification system for HCC on CT and MRI which
is an indication of the relative risk of HCC ranging from LR-1 (favoring benignity) to LR-5
(favoring malignancy). This is used only in people with risk factors for HCC (chronic hepatitis
infections, cirrhosis, but not cirrhosis due to cardiac or vascular etiologies). The 2018 version
describes major and ancillary criteria: the major imaging criteria lead to the assignment of
the LI-RADS score, while the ancillary findings may be used as tie breakers.
Major criteria for HCC:
Arterial enhancement.
Non-peripheral washout on portal venous and delayed phases.
Enhancing apsule/pseudocapsule seen in portal venous or delayed phases.
Threshold growth with diameter increase of >50% in <6 months.
Ancillary findings favoring HCC include non-enhancing capsule, nodule-in-nodule architecture, mosaic
architecture, fat in mass, blood products in mass.
Treatment options for HCC include partial hepatectomy, orthotopic liver transplantation,
radiation therapy, percutaneous ablation, and transcatheter embolization.
Fibrolamellar HCC
Fibrolamellar HCC: Axial CT (top left image) shows al heterogeneous lesion corresponding to heterogeneous: signal
on T2-weighted MRI (top right). DWI (bottom left) and post-contrast (bottom right) images show hypercellular
enhancing components within the mass (arrows).
Fibrolamellar carcinoma is a rare subtype of HCC that occurs in young patients without
cirrhosis. The tumor tends to be large when diagnosed but has a better prognosis than
typical HCC. Unlike in conventional HCC, AFP is not elevated.
On imaging, fibrolamellar HCC is a large, heterogeneous liver mass. A fibrotic central scar is
classic, which is hypointense on T1- and T2-weighted MRI images (in contrast, focal nodular
hyperplasia features a T2 hyperintense scar that enhances late). Capsular retraction may be
seen in 10%.
Unlike HCC, the fibrolamellar subtype does not have a capsule, although there may be a
pseudocapsule of peripherally compressed normal hepatic tissue.
GI: 107