Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)
Finger-in-glove sign of ABPA: Chest radiograph shows upper-lobe predominant bronchiectasis with branching
perihilar opacities. CT: shows dense bronchial mucoid impaction representing the finger-in-glove sign (arrow).
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a hypersensitivity reaction to aspergillus
seen most commonly in patients with long-standing asthma. ABPA is not an infection.
Patients present clinically with recurrent wheezing, low-grade fever, cough, and sputum
production containing fragments of aspergillus hyphae. The diagnosis may be made using
serum testing for aspergillus IgE.
The key finding on CT is central bronchiectasis and mucoid impaction, which can be high
attenuation or even calcified. This combination of mucoid impaction within bronchiectatic
airways represents the finger-in-glove sign.
The finger-in-glove sign is not specific to ABPA, however high attenuation mucus is a specific finding.
Saprophytic aspergillosis aspergilloma)
An aspergilloma is a conglomeration of
intertwined aspergillus fungal hyphae and
cellular debris (a mycetoma or "fungus ball")
in a preexisting pulmonary cavity.
The aspergilloma is mobile and will shift position
when the patient is imaged in a different position.
The most common causes of a preexisting
cavity are prior TB and sarcoidosis.
Less common causes include congenital anomalies
such as bronchogenic cyst or sequestration, and
opinectiouyportaumate pneumatocele.
Aspergilloma and Monod sign: CT shows an irregular
If an aspergilloma is symptomatic, hemoptysis opacity (arrows) resting dependent within a left
is the most common symptom. Treatment
upper lobe cavity, representing an aspergilloma
is embolization or resection rather than
(arrows). The Monod: sign is the curvilinear air
antifungal medication.
surrounding the aspergilloma. This patient has prior
TB with biapical scarring and left apical cavity.
When a crescent of air is seen outlining the Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and
mycetoma against the wall of the cavity, the Women's Hospital.
correct term is Monod sign. The air crescent
sign is reserved for angioinvasive aspergillus.
Chest: 30