SALIVARY GLANDS
OVERVIEW AND ANATOMY OF THE SALIVARY GLANDS
Overview
The major salivary glands are, in order of decreasing size, the parotid, submandibular, and
sublingual glands.
There are also numerous unnamed minor salivary glands throughout the mucosa of the
head and neck, especially the palate.
Neoplasms in smaller glands are more likely to be malignant, with the risk highest in
sublingual and minor salivary glands, followed by the submandibular gland, and least in the
parotid gland.
Parotid glands
The parotid glands are divided by the facial nerve into superficial and deep lobes. Since the
facial nerve is not normally visible on imaging, radiologists use the retromandibular vein as
the demarcation.
The deep lobe extends through the stylomandibular tunnel into the prestyloid
parapharyngeal space, discussed later in this chapter.
The inferior projection of the superficial lobe overlying the angle of the mandible is called
the parotid tail.
The parotid glands are the only salivary glands to contain internal lymph nodes, mostly
located in the superficial lobe along the retromandibular vein.
Accessory parotid glands may be located along the parotid duct, which is also called Stensen
duct, superficial to the masseter muscle.
Submandibular gland
The submandibular glands sit partly in the floor of the mouth (sublingual space) and mostly
in the neck (submandibular space). Each gland wraps around the posterior margin of the
mylohyoid muscle, which separates the floor of the mouth from the neck.
The gland may remodel the adjacent inner surface of the angle of the mandible, causing a
normal variant depression called a Stafne bone cavity/cyst.
The submandibular duct, which is also called Wharton duct, opens on the side of the
frenulum of the tongue.
Sublingual gland
The sublingual glands sit at the anterior aspect of the floor of the mouth.
Although normally confined to the sublingual space, the gland may herniate into the
submandibular space through a normal variant discontinuity in the mylohyoid muscle called
a mylohyoid boutonnière.
The sublingual glands drain via numerous small ducts, collectively termed Rivinus ducts,
which may form a larger common duct, the Bartholin duct, that empties into the Wharton
duct.
Neuro Head & Neck: 789