Herpes encephalitis (continued)
Once the infection becomes hemorrhagic, MRI will show foci of T1 shortening and gradient
susceptibility. The affected areas typically demonstrate reduced diffusion.
Enhancement may develop later in the infection, and is typically gyral in morphology-
In an immunocompromised patient, HSV-6 infection should be considered with the above
findings, although enhancement and diffusion abnormalities may be absent.
The differential diagnosis of medial temporal lobe lesions includes MCA infarction,
infiltrating glioma, limbic encephalitis, and seizure-related changes. Fever is typically absent
in infarction and glioma. Herpes encephalitis should be the first consideration in any patient
with fever and signal abnormality in the medial temporal lobe.
Treatment is urgent antiviral therapy.
HIV encephalopathy
HIV encephalopathy is the most common CNS infection in AIDS patients. It is a progressive
neurodegenerative disease caused by direct infection of CNS lymphocytes and microglial
cells (CNS macrophages) by the HIV virus.
On imaging, HIV encephalitis manifests as diffuse cerebral atrophy and symmetric T2
prolongation in the periventricular and deep white matter.
As previously discussed, in contrast to progressive multifocal eukpencephalopathy (PML),
HIV encephalitis spares the subcortical U-fibers and tends to be symmetric.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) encephalitis
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) encephalitis only affects the immunosuppressed, typically when the
CD4 cells are less than 50 cells/pL.
The most common CNS manifestation of CMV infection is ventriculitis or
meningoencephalitis.
The characteristic imaging features of CMV ventriculitis include subependymal FLAIR
hyperintensity and enhancement throughout the ventricular system.
In neonates, CMV is one of the most common TORCH infections and causes atrophy,
encephalomalacia, ventricular enlargement, and periventricular calcification.
FUNGAL INFECTION
Radiologic manifestations of CNS fungal infections are often nonspecific, including
parenchymal abscesses, granulomas, cerebritis, meningitis, vasculitis, or mycotic aneurysms.
Imaging features that help distinguish intracranial fungal abscesses from bacterial abscesses
include crenated/lobulated border, nonenhancing intracavitary projections (thought to
represent fungal hyphae) with restricted diffusion, and a core without restricted diffusion.
Skull base involvement (basilar meningitis) is a common feature in fungal infections and can
present as multiple cranial nerve palsies.
Fungal mycotic aneurysms often arise from the proximal cerebral vasculature and are
fusiform in morphology (due to involvement of long segments of vessel wall), in contrast to
bacterial mycotic aneurysms which are typically saccular, small, multiple, and arise distally.
Immune status of the patient and geographic distribution of some fungal organisms can also
help narrow down the differential.
Fungal organisms that infect immunocompetent patients: Cryptococcus neoformans, Coccidioides immitis,
Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomyces dermatitidis.
Fungal organisms that infect immunocompromised patients: Aspergillus, Candida, Mucormycoses.
Neuro Brain: 747