Describe the location by naming the quadrant and (optionally) the depth
The four quadrants of each breast are: Upper outer quadrant, upper inner quadrant, lower
outer quadrant, and lower inner quadrant.
When referring to the opposite breast, the mirror opposite quadrant is the contralateral
quadrant with the same name. For instance, the upper outer quadrant of the left breast is
the mirror opposite quadrant of the upper outer quadrant of the right breast.
If subareolar or axillary tail are used to localize a lesion, then it is not necessary to specify a
quadrant.
Although clockface is used for ultrasound location, quadrant is preferred for mammography.
Depth is commonly described as anterior (or shallow), middle, or posterior depth,
separating the breast into thirds.
Measure the size
Size is a poor predictor of malignancy, but changes in size determine if a lesion is growing.
Look for associated features
Architectural distortion represents radiating linear densities emanating from a central point,
without a definite mass visible. Architectural distortion is caused by tethering of the normal
fibroglandular tissue and is highly concerning for a cancer, although there are some benign
causes. If there is no history of surgery or trauma, biopsy is appropriate.
Microcalcifications may be associated with malignant ductal calcification.
Skin retraction is most commonly postsurgical but may be due to a desmoplastic tumor.
Nipple retraction is tethering or angulation of the nipple. Retraction should not be
confused with inversion (where the whole nipple points inwards). Nipple inversion may be
developmental, bilateral, and is not necessarily a sign of malignancy if stable.
Skin thickening may represent edema or may be secondary to prior radiation therapy.
Trabecular thickening represents thickening of the fibrous septa of the breast, which can be
seen in edema or in patients who have received radiation therapy.
Axillary adenopathy may be hyperplastic or malignant. Although it is normal for a few nodes
to be present in the axilla, nodes with replacement of the normal fatty hilum may warrant
evaluation, especially if new.
Example of BI-RADS terminology
CC view mammogram (left image) shows an oval mass (yellow arrow) with partially obscured margins in the
inner anterior breast. The mass is better evaluated on spot compression view (right image) and demonstrates
microlobulated margins (red arrows). Biopsy of this mass revealed papilloma with carcinoma in situ.
Breast: 381