IDH-wildtype diffuse gliomas (continued)
On MRI, IDH-wildtype glioblastomas typically have heterogeneous enhancement,
corresponding histologically to microvascular proliferation and necrosis. Surrounding
nonenhancing T2 prolongation consists of both vasogenic edema and infiltrative tumor.
The enhancing component and sometimes the non-enhancing infiltrative component can
exhibit low diffusivity (dark ADC) on diffusion-weighted imaging due to hypercellularity, and
elevated blood volume (rCBV) on perfusion-weighted imaging, indicating hypervascularity.
Tumor can spread through white matter tracts, through the CSF, and along leptomeningeal,
ependymal, and subependymal routes. There are several specific terms reflecting aggressive
growth patterns:
When glioblastoma crosses the midline via the corpus callosum, it is called butterfly glioblastoma.
The differential diagnosis of a transcallosal mass includes glioblastoma, lymphoma, and demyelinating
disease.
When diffuse glioma, usually IDH-wildtype, involves at least three lobes of the brain, it is called
gliomatosis cerebri. The differential diagnosis for diffuse signal abnormality includes progressive
multifocal eukoencephalopathy and HIV encephalopathy, but these entities do not infiltrate the cortex.
When there are multiple enhancing glioblastoma lesions, the tumors are multifocal if they are connected
by FLAIR abnormality or, more rarely, multicentric if no connection is present.
When intracranial tumors disseminate to the intradural extramedullary compartment of the spine, they
are called drop metastases.
Transependymal and transcallosal spread of Gliomatosis: Axial FLAIR shows infiltrative FLAIR hyperintensity
GBM: Post-contrast T1-weighted MRI shows in the left cerebral hemisphere involving the left parietal lobe,
extensive abnormal enhancement primarily in posterior frontal lobe, insula, left temporal lobe, and corpus
the left occipital lobe but extending into the callosum. There is regional mass effect with effacement of the
bilateral periventricular frontal lobes via the left lateral ventricle, sulcal effacement, and rightward midline
subependymal surface (yellow arrows) and shift. No associated contrast enhancement or restricted
crossing the midline via the corpus callosum diffusion is seen.
(red arrow).
Left case courtesy Amir. Zamani, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Neuro Brain: 709