Biopsy of a renal mass
After full imaging workup is complete, there are several well-accepted indications for
percutaneous renal mass biopsy:
To distinguish renal cell carcinoma from metastasis in a patient with a known primary.
To distinguish between renal infection and cystic neoplasm.
To definitively diagnose al hyperdense, homogeneously enhancing mass (after MRI has been performed),
as it may represent a benign angiomyolipoma with minimal fat versus a renal cell carcinoma.
To definitively diagnose a suspicious renal mass in patient with multiple comorbidities for whom
nephrectomy would be high risk.
To definitely diagnose malignancy and subtype in unresectable disease to guide treatment.
To ensure correct tissue diagnosis prior to renal mass ablation or stereotactic radiotherapy.
To provide definite diagnosis in patients with multiple or bilateral renal masses.
To provide definite diagnosis in a renal mass that is in a solitary (or transplant) kidney.
To exclude benign neoplasm in small renal masses (K4 cm), as 20% of solid renal masses are benign, and
proportion increases among smaller masses.
CYSTIC RENAL MASSES
Overview of Bosniak classification of cystic renal masses
The 2019 Bosniak classification for cystic renal masses was updated from 2012 to
incorporate MRI, formalize definitions, and reclassify additional masses as lower risk. The
Bosniak system risk-stratifies cystic renal masses, with increasing risk for malignancy (RCC)
with each subsequent category. Classification is based on morphology, and thus MRI criteria
generally mirror those of CT. Calcification plays a limited role in classification.
MRI frequently upgrades Bosniak criteria due to higher sensitivity for detecting features
including septations. MRI can also provide more accuate characterization of enhancement
and is most useful to distinguish a Bosniak IIF lesion from a Bosniak III lesion (which can
impact management). MRI is not obscured by calcification which also permits easier lesion
evaluation.
Risk stratification of cystic renal mass based on Bosniak classification:
Category I and I: <1% risk of malignancy. No follow-up necessary.
Category IIF: 0-38% risk of malignancy. Imaging follow-up is needed; any morphologic change or new
enhancement would be concerning for malignancy.
Category II: -50% risk of malignancy but range varies by studies. Concern for malignancy, but may be
benign (e.g., infection, multilocular cystic nephroma). Management varies from imaging follow-up to
surgical excision (if without comorbidities).
Category IV: 90% risk of malignancy. Surgical excision is required unless significant comorbidities.
GU: 257