BONE LESIONS ORGANIZED BY CELL OF ORIGIN
BONE FORMING (OSTEO-) LESIONS
Benign and incidental: Enostosis (bone island)
Enostosis (commonly called a bone island) is an extremely common incidental finding of a
small spiculated osteoblastic focus.
Al bone island is only clinically significant in that it may rarely be difficult to differentiate from
an osteoblastic metastasis, osteoid osteoma, or a low-grade osteosarcoma.
A giant variant (>2 cm) may be most difficult to differentiate from low-grade osteosarcoma.
Bone scan of bone island is usually normal.
Osteopoikilosis is an autosomal dominant syndrome of multiple bone islands and keloid
formation.
Osteopathia striata is a benign, asymptomatic sclerotic dysplasia characterized by linear
bands of sclerosis in the long bones and fan-like sclerosis in the flat pelvic bones. Bone scan
is typically normal.
Benign and incidental: Osteoma
Osteoma is a slow growing lesion
that may arise from the cortex of the
Osteoma: Axial head
skull or the frontal/ethmoid sinuses.
CT in bone window
Gardner syndrome is an autosomal
shows a densely
sclerotic osteoma
dominant syndrome of multiple
arising from the
osteomas, intestinal polyposis, and
cortex of the frontal
soft-tissue desmoid tumors.
sinus.
In contrast to a bone island, osteoma
arises from cortex rather than
medullary canal.
Benign: Melorheostosis
Melorheostosis is a non-neoplastic
proliferation of thickened and
irregular cortex with a typical
Melorheostosis:
candle-wax appearance.
Frontal radiograph of the
It clinically presents with pain,
right tibia and fibula shows
decreased range of motion, leg-
thickened, irregular wavy
bowing, and leg-length discrepancy.
cortex of the medial tibia
(arrow).
Melorheostosis may be associated
with scleroderma-like skin lesions
Case courtesy Michael
Callahan, MD, Boston
over the affected region.
Children's Hospital.
Melorheostosis is usually seen in a
single lower limb, in the distribution
of a single sclerotome. A sclerotome
represents a zone supplied by a
single sensory nerve.
Melorheostosis features intense
uptake on bone scan.
MSK: 937