Nitrogen-13 ammonia (continued)
N-13 has excellent imaging characteristics. N-13 positrons have a low kinetic energy and do
not travel very far in the tissue before annihilating, which allows relatively high resolution.
The short half-life also allows large doses to be given for high counts.
Like rubidium-82, N-13 perfusion is almost always coupled with a pharmacologic stress.
Exercise stress is possible with N-13 ammonia but can be logistically challenging due to the
10-minute half-life, as it has to be coordinated with the cyclotron delivery of the radiotracer.
Fluorine-18 FDG
MOmRe1BANOCAwAucA (F-18 FDG), the same radiotracer used for oncologic
imaging, is a positron emitting PET viability agent with a half-life of 110 minutes. Unlike
rubidium-82 and N-13 ammonia, FDG cannot be used for perfusion.
Viable myocardium uptakes FDG; scar does not.
TYPES OF STRESS = EXERCISE AND PHARMACOLOGIC
The stress component of a cardiac perfusion study can be physical or pharmacologic.
General exercise protocol
Prior to undergoing a myocardial perfusion study with exercise stress, the patient should
be NPO for 6 hours. In patients without known coronary artery disease, calcium channel
blockers and B-blockers should be held to allow patient to reach target heart rate. Long-
acting nitrates may mask ischemia and should also be held when possible.
Exercise is performed with a multistage treadmill (Bruce or modified Bruce) protocol. The
target heart rate, which is calculated as 85% of maximal heart rate must be achieved for the
study to be diagnostic. The maximal calculated heart rate is 220 bpm minus age.
Other parameters used to assess the adequacy of exercise stress include the product of
peak heart rate and peak systolic blood pressure, metabolic equivalents (METS), and exercise
time.
Contraindications for exercise stress include acute myocardial infarction (within 48
hours), high risk unstable angina, sustained or nemodynamically significant ventricular
tachyarrhythmia, acute aortic dissection, acute pulmonary embolism, acute pericarditis,
severe symptomatic aortic stenosis, decompensated heart failure, or inability to exercise.
Pharmacologic stress is an alternative in patients who cannot exercise physically or in those
with left bundle branch block, which can cause false positive reversible septal perfusion
defects with exercise.
Dipyridamole stress - pharmacologic vasodilator
Dipyridamole is an adenosine deaminase inhibitor that allows endogenous adenosine to
accumulate. Adenosine is a potent vasodilator, increasing coronary blood flow by 3-5 times.
The microcirculation fed by a critical coronary artery stenosis cannot further dilate in
response to adenosine. That coronary artery territory will appear as a relative perfusion
defect on stress imaging.
Unlike a physical stress, a dipyridamole stress does not increase cardiac work or O2 demand.
Caffeine and theophylline competitively inhibit vasodilation from dipyridamole and must be
held for at least 12 hours.
Side effects of dipyridamole include nausea, dizziness, headache, flushing, and chest pain,
wheezing, and rarely heart block. The antidote is aminophylline (100-200 mg), which
has a shorter half-life than dipyridamole, SO patients with wheezing or heart block from
dipyridamole must be warned that symptoms may rarely reappear after several hours.
Cardiac: 489