KIDNEYS
RADIOTRACERS
Tc-99m DTPA
DTPA can measure glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and evaluate renal perfusion.
DTPA is excreted by glomerular filtration. Approximately 20% is extracted by the glomerulus
into the tubules with each pass. This is the identical extraction fraction as inulin, which is
used to exactly measure GFR.
Tc-99m MAG3
MAG3 can estimate renal plasma flow and evaluate renal perfusion, however MAG3 cannot
measure GFR.
MAG3 is filtered and excreted by the tubules. Greater than 50% is extracted by the
glomerulus into the tubules with each pass. MAG3 is cleared predominantly by the proximal
tubules with minimal filtration. It has a higher extraction fraction than DTPA, which provides
better images in patients with renal insufficiency or obstruction.
Tc-99m DMSA
DMSA scanning is performed in children to evaluate for the presence of renal scarring
associated with pyelonephritis. The collecting system is not imaged.
DMSA is a specialized cortical agent. It is bound in the renal tubules, which allows anatomic
imaging of the cortex. It is the only renal tracer where SPECT imaging is performed.
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF RENAL IMAGING
Renogram
A nuclear renogram is a time-activity curve that provides a graphical representation of renal
uptake and excretion. Approximately 10 mCi Tc-99m MAG3 (most commonly) or DTPA is
administered. A normal renogram has three phases:
1) Flow or perfusion phase has a sharp upslope and lasts -1 minute after injection. Normal kidneys are
visualized within 2-5 seconds following visualization of the aorta. A slow upslope suggests decreased
perfusion.
2) Cortical function phase usually occurs in the first 1-3 minutes, peaks at 3-5 minutes (= time to peak
activity). Decreased renal function produces delayed cortical uptake.
3) Clearance phase is characterized by rapid urine excretion into the collecting system, which usually
begins after 3 minutes. Normally half of the renal activity should be cleared in 8-12 minutes (= half-time
excretion). Lack of pelvicalyceal clearance suggests obstruction.
I
#
U
e 5
clearance phase
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28
time (minutes)
Nucs: 477