Lemierre syndrome (continued)
Imaging shows enlargement, thrombosis, and mural enhancement of the affected veins.
Pulmonary septic emboli may be present.
Tuberculous adenitis (scrofula)
Tuberculous adenitis is usually seen in patients of Asian descent who present with painless
neck masses. maging findings are classically bilateral necrotic lymph nodes, often in
the level V posterior triangle distribution, occasionally multiloculated with ring-like
enhancement. Sinus tracts to skin can form at the late stage. The nodes classically calcify
after treatment.
Cat scratch fever
Cat scratch fever is an infection caused by Bartonella henselae and can present with
fever, malaise, and regional ymphadenopathy. It can be self-limited or can progress to
encephalopathy and neuropathy.
THYROID AND PARATHYROID
DIFFUSE THYROID DISEASE
Hashimoto thyroiditis (chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis)
Hashimoto thyroiditis is an autoimmune disease that is thought to be due to autoantibodies
to thyroglobulins. It is the most common cause of hypothyroidism.
The diagnosis is often made serologically. Patients are often euthyroid early in disease, but
eventually become hypothyroid due to replacement of functioning thyroid parenchyma.
Ultrasound may show either a diffusely micronodular gland or a heterogeneous coarsened
gland without a measurable nodule. The isthmus is characteristically thickened. In its end
stage, the gland becomes atrophic.
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis are at increased risk of thyroid lymphoma.
Graves disease
8C44
6.5M
Thyrd
Gene/2
Graves disease: Sagittal grayscale ultrasound of the thyroid (left) demonstrates a diffusely enlarged gland with
coarsened, heterogeneous echotexture. Color Doppler (right image) shows markedly increased Doppler flow
representing the thyroid inferno sign.
Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Graves disease causes autoimmune activation of the TSH receptor, stimulating thyroid
hormone synthesis and secretion. Patients clinically present with thyrotoxicosis.
Ultrasound may show diffuse enlargement of the gland, a coarsened echotexture and
hypervascularity. The borders of the gland are often lobulated.
Neuro Head & Neck: 856