MUCOSAL SPACES: ORAL CAVITY, PHARYNX, LARYNX
The oral cavity is a space defined by the anterior 2/3 of tongue, bounded superiorly by the
palate and inferiorly by the floor of mouth.
The pharynx is a muscular tube extending from skull base to the thoracic inlet. It is the
anatomic center of the head and neck, around which the other suprahyoid spaces wrap. It is
divided into the following distinct anatomic regions:
Nasopharynx: Top of pharynx behind the nasal cavity.
Oropharynx: From the level of the palate to the hyoid bone, behind the oral cavity. The posterior 1/3 of
tongue is part of the oropharynx.
Hypopharynx: From the hyoid bone to the esophagus, including the piriform sinuses and soft tissue
lateral to the larynx.
Mucosal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) arises from the squamous lining of the pharynx,
larynx, and sinonasal cavity.
The TNM staging system is used to classify SCC. "T" refers to the primary tumor extent, "N"
to regional lymph nodes, and "M" for distant metastases. The criterion for T and N stage
is individualized to each site (nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx) and in the case
of the larynx to each subsite (supraglottic, glottic, and subglottic). Regardless of subtype,
tumor size and lymph nodes are reported using the longest diameter, which is in contrast
with lymph node measurements in other parts of the body. An exhaustive discussion of
TNM staging is beyond the scope of this book, however some key points and differentiating
factors are discussed below.
NASOPHARYNX
Overview and anatomy
The nasopharynx is located posterior to the nasal cavity and extends from the most cranial
aspect of the pharynx (at the skull base) to the level of the soft palate.
In the midline of the nasopharynx is the nasopharyngeal tonsillar tissue, also known as the
adenoid. This is where nasopharyngeal lymphoma can arise.
Nasopharyngeal SCC
Most nasopharyngeal carcinomas arise from the fossa of Rossenmuller, which is adjacent
to the opening of the Eustachian tube. The proximity explains why nasopharyngeal tumors
result in middle ear effusion at the time of presentation.
Nasopharyngeal SCC frequently demonstrates minimal mucosal disease and may have
significant extra-mucosal extension, most frequently to the parapharyngeal space and then
the retropharyngeal space.
T staging of nasopharyngeal carcinoma is primarily defined by tumor extent/ invasion, and
less on the size of the lesion as in other sites. T1 tumor is confined to the nasopharynx while
extension to the parapharyngeal spaces, infiltration into surrounding muscles, the bony skull
base, or intracranial extension results in a higher T stage. Given the importance of detection
of skull base infiltration and intracranial extension of disease, MR is the preferred staging
tool.
Lymph node metastases are common, and most frequently initially preferentially involve the
retropharyngeal and high jugular (level II) nodes.
Treatment is most frequently non-surgical and a combination of chemotherapy or radiation,
depending on the TNM stage.
Neuro Head & Neck: 834