FETAL MUSCULOSKELETAL IMAGING
Clubfoot
Left image shows normal foot-ankle relationship on grayscale ultrasound. Right image demonstrates a plantar
flexed right foot with the sole seen at the same plane as the lower leg, consistent with clubfoot.
The ankle-foot relationship should be assessed in every fetus.
Clubfoot (talipes equinovarus) is a congenital deformity of the ankle and foot in which the
foot is fixed in plantar flexion, with the forefoot adducted and heel inverted.
Clubfoot may be isolated or part of a syndrome. The presence of other structural
abnormalities in a fetus with clubfoot warrants workup for an underlying genetic disorder.
On ultrasound, the plantar surface of the foot is seen in the same plane as tibia and fibula.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (0I)
Osteogenesis imperfecta (non-fatal type):
Third-trimester fetal survey shows an
abnormal kinking (arrow) of the femur
from prior in utero fracture.
Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham
and Women's Hospital.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a spectrum of congenital bone anomalies characterized by
multiple fractures due to abnormal type I collagen. There are several types of OI, with type
2 being lethal. Type 2 can be diagnosed in the second trimester, but types 1, 3, and 4 are not
typically diagnosed until the third trimester.
OI causes severe shortening of the long bones (K<3 SD below the mean). The long bones and
ribs appear "wrinkled" due to multiple fractures. The thorax is usually small due to broken
and structurally soft ribs.
Unlike thanatophoric dysplasia, bony mineralization is decreased. Decreased calvarial
mineralization causes the entire brain (including the nearfield) to be unusually well
visualized.
Thanatophoric dysplasia
Thanatophoric dysplasia is a lethal skeletal dysplasia with characteristic telephone receiver
femurs, severe limb shortening and bowing, and rib shortening.
Platyspondyly is characteristic, which is flattening of the ossified portions of the vertebral
bodies.
The classic cloverleaf skull is caused by protrusion of the frontal and temporal lobes.
Bony mineralization is normal.
Obstetrics: 364