TEMPORAL BONE FRACTURES
Temporal bone fractures have been historically described by their orientation with respect
to the long axis of the petrous pyramid-longtudinal versus transverse-which classically
leads to conductive versus sensorineural hearing loss, respectively. However, this traditional
system does not correlate with clinical outcome or potential complications.
A newer classification system has been proposed, classifying fractures depending on
whether the otic capsule is spared or violated.
Otic apsule-sparing temporal bone fracture
Axial CT through the temporal bone
shows a nondisplaced fracture (arrow)
extending through the axis of the
petrous portion of the temporal bone.
The otic capsule is spared.
Otic capsule-sparing temporal bone fractures are much more common than otic capsule-
violating features, accounting for 94-97% of temporal bone features.
Otic capsule-sparing temporal bone fracture results from a temporoparietal blow and has an
increased incidence of conductive hearing loss secondary to ossicular injury.
The most common cause of conductive hearing loss is related to hemotympanum or
tympanic membrane rupture, which should resolve within a month of injury. Persistent
conductive hearing loss should prompt evaluation for ossicular injury.
The most frequently injured ossicle is the incus because it has the least ligamentous
support. Ossicular dislocation is more common than ossicular fracture.
Otic capsule-violating temporal bone fracture
Otic capsule-violating temporal bone fracture is much less common. It can involve the
vestibule, semicircular canals, cochlea and/or facial nerve.
It is often the result of an occipital blow and has a higher incidence of facial nerve paralysis,
sensorineural hearing loss, and CSF fistula.
Complications of temporal bone fracture
Facial nerve injury
Facial nerve transection results in immediate facial paralysis.
Delayed facial nerve injury can present secondary to contusion, edema, or hematoma.
Severity and onset helps guide clinical management. Delayed onset incomplete facial
paralysis may be treated with steroids and observation while surgical exploration is
considered if there is concern for transection.
Important CT findings include: Bone fragments impinging on the facial nerve, extension of
fracture to the nerve, and ossicles or hematoma impinging on the facial canal.
Neuro Head & Neck: 829