Spinal stenosis (continued)
Spinal Stenosis
Normal
Mild Spinal Stenosis
Moderate! Spinal Stenosis
Severe Spinal Stenosis
Disc
02
<
O
O
0
O 0900 00 O O
0000 ( 0
)
0
) O
00
0
Posterior arch
(lamina, facets,
ligamentumf favum)
Free distribution of nerve roots, Slight crowding of nerver roots
Crowding of nerve roots, resulting Complete effacement of CSF,
without crowding
ina a" "speckled" appearance of CSF
resulting in nerve roots not being
interspersed withr nerve roots
individually distinguishable
-Traversing dorsal and ventral
Traversing dorsal and ventral nerve - Difficult to differentiatet the
Cannot
identify nerve
roots int the lateral recesses remain
discretelyi
nerve roots int the lateral
distinct, but therer may be
traversing nerve roots int the lateral rootsi ini the lateral recesses
recesses are distinct
abutment oft the nerve roots int the recesses
lateral recesses
Anteriorr margin oft thet thecal sac Anteriorr margin oft thet thecal saci is Anteriorr margin of the thecal sac is - Anterior margin oft thet thecal sac
isf flat or convex
flat or concave
concave
isc concave
4 Posterior epidural fati is
Posteriore epidural fati is preserved
Posteriore epidural fati is preserved .Posterior epiduralfatr may be
preserved (dependent onl level) (dependent on level)
(dependent onl level)
partially or completelye effaced
Normal (no spinal stenosis): Anterior margin of the Mild spinal stenosis: There is concave anterior
thecal sac is flat. Nerve roots are freely distributed; margin of the thecal sac due to a disc bulge. Minimal
the traversing nerve roots (yellow arrows) course
crowding of nerve roots posteriorly.
normally in the lateral recesses without mass effect.
Moderate spinal stenosis: There is diffuse crowding Severe spinal stenosis: There is compression of the
of nerve roots, resulting in a "speckled" appearance of thecal sac (red arrows) and complete effacement of
nerve roots and CSF.
CSF. Nerve roots are not individually distinguishable.
Normal and varying degrees of spinal stenosis in 4 different patients. All images are axial T2-weighted MR.
Spine: 886