IMAGING OF THE MALE URETHRA
Retrograde urethrogram (RUG)
Retrograde urethrogram (RUG) provides excellent evaluation of the anterior urethra and
may be performed to evaluate for suspected urethral injury, stricture, or fistula.
To perform a RUG, the fossa navicularis is cannulated with a sterile balloon-tipped catheter
that is inflated with 1-2 mL saline. Subsequently, approximately 10 mL of contrast is hand-
injected under fluoroscopy.
Voiding ystourethrogram (VCUG)
Voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) best evaluates the posterior urethra and is typically
performed for evaluation of bladder and voiding function.
To perform a VCUG, a Foley catheter is sterilely placed in the bladder and subsequently
contrast is instilled into the bladder. The patient initiates urination during fluoroscopy.
Urethral stricture
Urethral strictures secondary to sexually transmitted disease (most commonly chronic
urethritis from Neisseria gonorrhoede) occur most commonly in the bulbous urethra. A
complication of chronic urethral infection is a periurethral abscess, which may result in a
urethroperineal fistula.
Post-traumatic saddle injury strictures also tend to occur in the bulbous urethra.
In contrast, an iatrogenic stricture from a Foley catheter tends to occur in the penile urethra
at the penile-scrotal junction.
Urethral trauma
Type III urethral injury: Retrograde urethrogram (left image) shows free extravasation of contrast (arrows)
at the bulbomembranous urethra (red arrows). Post-RUG CT shows the excreted contrast in the left inguinal
space (arrows) and the deep pelvis. Pelvic fractures and gas from a projectile tract are partially seen.
Case courtesy Chery!. Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
In the setting of trauma, if there is blood at the meatus, painful urination, or inability to
void, a RUG should be performed emergently to exclude an urethral injury. If confirmed, a
suprapubic catheter is typically placed.
There are five types of urethral injury. Type III, pictured above, is the most common, with
disruption of the urogenital diaphragm and rupture of the bulbomembranous urethra with
contrast extravasating both into the pelvis and out into the perineum.
GU: 277