PI-RADS (continued)
Studies have shown that PI-RADS score correlated with Gleason score 23 + 4 disease,
whereas Gleason <4 disease generally does not have a MRI correlate.
Note that PI-RADS does not address the use of MRI for detection of suspected recurrent
prostate cancer following therapy, progression during surveillance, or use of MRI for
evaluating other parts of the body involved with prostate cancer.
Prostate cancer staging
Prostate cancer uses the TNM staging system.
T: Ifthe tumori is confined within the prostate or extends beyond the capsule (involvement of seminal
vesicles or neurovascular bundle). If there is tumor fixation or invasion into other adjacent structures
(e.g., bladder, rectum).
N: Metastasis to regional lymph nodes (pelvic, hypogastric, sacral, internal and external iliac).
M: Non-regional lymph node involvement (aortic, common iliac, inguinal, and supraclavicular), bone, and
distant organ involvement.
MRI can help determine N or M status, although PET/CT or CT is more commonly used
for nodal staging. If PSA is high or there is suspicion for metastasis, a bone scan is usually
performed to evaluate for osteoblastic bone metastasis.
Staging example: T2a prostate cancer, which can be treated with radical prostatectomy.
Axial T2-weighted MRI with an endorectal coil in place Coronal T2-weighted image through the posterior
shows a focus of hypointensity within the posterior portion of the gland shows the tumor as a
left peripheral zone (arrows), representing the site of focal region of T2 hypointensity (arrow) in the
cancer. There is no extraglandular extension.
peripheral zone.
Axial ADC map shows that the tumor features
Axial early-phase dynamic gradient-echo contrast-
restricted diffusion (arrow; dark on the ADC map).
enhanced MRI shows relative hyperenhancement
of the prostate cancer (arrow).
In this case, the focus of prostate cancer is entirely confined within the gland. The tumor involves less
than one-half of one lobe for a stage of T2a. Because the tumor is SO small, the advanced techniques of
diffusion and dynamic contrast enhancement are helpful to increase specificity.
GU: 283