Infantile hemangioma/hemanyioendotheliomo
Grayscale (left image) and power Doppler (right image) ultrasound images of the liver show al highly vascular
mass in the right hepatic lobe (arrows), containing numerous dilated vascular spaces.
T2-weighted MRI shows a T2 hyperintense,
T1-weighted fat-saturated MRI shows the mass to be
predominantly solid mass (arrows) in the right liver. predominantly T1 hypointense relative to liver.
Post-contrast early-phase T1-weighted fat-saturated Post-contrast later-phase T1-weighted fat-saturated
MRI shows intense enhancement of the tumor
MRI shows lack of contrast opacification of the central
periphery.
tumor, consistent with tumor necrosis.
Infantile hemangioma. Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Infantile hemangioma and hemangioendotnelioma are related vascular neoplasms. They
are the most common vascular hepatic tumors, often in children under age 1 year and may
cause congestive heart failure in up to 25%. AFP is not elevated; endothelial growth factor is
elevated.
Infantile hemangioma is benign. While nemangioendotneloma is usually benign, it has the potential to
metastasize. This text will use the term "infantile hemangioma" to include both of these entities.
Infantile hemangioma is associated with Kasabach-Merrit syndrome, which is a syndrome of vascular
neoplasm, hemolytic anemia, and consumptive coagulopathy.
Infantile hemangioma may be focal, multifocal, or diffuse. Lesions are highly vascular,
T2 hyperintense, and tend to peripherally enhance with delayed fill-in. There may be
calcification, central necrosis, and hemorrhage.
Angiography (which can be performed prior to embolization) classically shows an enlarged celiac artery,
with a decreased caliber of the aorta distal to the celiac axis.
Similar to cutaneous infantile hemangiomas, most hepatic infantile hemangiomas will
spontaneously involute in the first year of life, especially if GLUT-1 positive. The beta-blocker
propranolol may accelerate involution. Surgery may be necessary for lesions causing CHF.
Peds: 1142