Apical petrositis (petrous apicitis)
A relatively rare complication of infectious otomastoiditis, apical petrositis is also known as
petrous apicitis and results when infection extends medially into a pneumatized petrous
apex.
In the early stages of apical petrositis, there is opacification of the petrous apex air cells with
progressive bony demineralization and resorption, resulting in localized osteomyelitis of the
skull base.
The classic Gradenigo triad is not commonly seen, but is comprised of otomastoiditis, facial
pain due to trigeminal neuropathy at Meckel's cave, and lateral rectus palsy from sixth
cranial nerve palsy at Dorello's canal.
Vascular complications of apical petrositis include internal carotid arteritis and dural venous
thrombosis.
Schwannoma
A petrous apex schwannoma may originate from cranial nerves V, VII, or VIII. Imaging shows
a circumscribed, smoothly expansile, enhancing mass that may cause bony remodeling.
Large tumors may become cystic and contain fluid levels.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis eosinophilic granuloma)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a neoplastic proliferation of eosinophils and Langerhans
cells. The temporal bone is the most common site of skull base involvement.
CT: shows a well-circumscribed destructive lesion, usually with nonsclerotic margins.
MRI shows the LCH lesions as soft-tissue masses surrounded by bone marrow and soft tissue
edema. Marked enhancement is characteristic.
Chondrosarcoma
Chondrosarcoma is a malignant neoplasm that characteristically arises in the midline from
the clivus or slightly offmidline from the petro-occipital fissure. CT often shows a tumor
with a ring-and-arc chondroid matrix, although internal matrix is not always seen. MRI
shows a lobular, cauliflower-shaped, hyperintense mass on T2-weighted images.
Chordoma
Chordoma subsequently discussed in the section on clival lesions) most commonly arises
from the clivus but may expand laterally to secondarily involve the petrous apex. In some
circumstances it can be difficult to distinguish between chordoma and chondrosarcoma.
Endolymphatic sac tumor
Axial noncontrast CT (left image) demonstrates a destructive mass with internal calcification (arrows) centered
at the posterior wall of the right mastoid air cells in region of the vestibular aqueduct, and involves the right
IAC, semicircular canals, and middle ear cavity. Location of the mass suggests an endolymphatic sac tumor.
Subsequent MRI shows the mass is intrinsically T1 hyperintense (axial T1-weighted image on the right),
heterogeneously T2 hyperintense, and does not enhance.
Neuro Head & Neck: 831