Spinal cord infarction (continued)
Spinal cord infarction clinically presents with loss of bowel and bladder control, loss of
perineal sensation, and impairment in both motor and sensory function of the legs.
Risk factors for spinal cord infarction include aortic surgery, aortic aneurysm, arteritis, sickle
cell anemia, vascular malformation, and disc herniation.
Imaging of spinal cord infarction shows hyperintensity of the affected cord regions on T2-
weighted images. The cord may be enlarged and typically shows restricted diffusion.
Concomitant vertebral body infarction may be present, which is more common in sickle cell
disease and chronic steroid use.
High-flow vascular arteriovenous) malformation
Sagittal T2 MRI (left image) shows subtle flow voids dorsal to the thoracic spinal cord (yellow arrows). Coronal
TWIST MRA: subtraction image (middle) demonstrates serperginous vessels in the dorsal spinal canal (red
arrows). Coronal oblique digital subtraction angiogram (right image) following injection of contrast into the left
T11 segmental artery shows early opacification of an engorged and tortuous dorsal spinal vein (blue arrows).
These findings are consistent with a type I dural spinal AV fistula arising from the left T11 segmental artery.
Dural arteriovenous fistulas (dAVF) are the most common spinal vascular malformations.
They are high-flow vascular malformations characterized angiographically by a
adiculomeningea. feeding artery, no intervening nidus, and radicular vein at the nerve root
sheath just under the pedicle draining retrograde to perimedullary veins.
The resulting venous hypertension causes progressive congestive myelopathy. It typically
presents in older males.
MRI of dAVF often shows a long segment of edema in the cord (+/- mild cord expansion)
and surrounding intradural extramedullary vascular flow voids representing dilated
perimedullary veins. CT myelography shows serpentine intradural filling defects.
Dural AVF may be occult on CTA and MRA, and it may need to be diagnosed with catheter
angiography based on clinical symptoms or presence of brain or spinal hemorrhage.
Foix-Alajouanine myelopathy is the eponym of the congestive myelopathy caused by dAVF.
Less common spinal high-flow vascular malformations include intramedullary glomus
arteriovenous malformation (AVM; nidus within spinal cord), uvenile/metameric AVM
(multiple pial/dural/extradural feeding arteries, large nidus within spinal cord and possibly
bone or soft tissues), and pial AVF (anterior or posterior spinal artery feeder).
Spine: 868