Vocal cord paralysis
Vocal cord paralysis is most commonly due to iatrogenic trauma from neck surgery, but
may be secondary to a mass along the course of the vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerves.
Other conditions include stroke, infection, laryngeal neoplasm, MS and neuro-degenerative
disease.
The most common mass to cause left vocal cord paralysis is a mediastinal or thoracic mass;
however, enlargement of the left atrium or pulmonary arteries may cause cardiovocal
syndrome due to recurrent laryngeal nerve compression.
The CT imaging of vocal cord paralysis shows a thickened, medialized aryepiglottic fold and
enlargement of the piriform sinus on the affected side.
The left recurrent laryngeal nerve is the most commonly affected nerve. Imaging for vocal
cord paralysis should extend from the skull base to the level of the left pulmonary artery to
cover the full course of the vagus and the left recurrent laryngeal nerves.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve innervates all laryngeal musculature except the cricothyroid
muscle, which is innervated by the superior laryngeal nerve.
Laryngocele
Al laryngocele is a dilation of the laryngeal ventricle, which may be caused by high laryngeal
pressures. Trumpet players, glassblowers, and patients with COPD have increased risk of
developing a laryngocele. A laryngocele may be filled with air or fluid.
An important differential consideration is ventricular obstruction by neoplasm (most
commonly squamous cell carcinoma), which typically causes a fluid-filled laryngocele.
Laryngeal SCC
Supraglottic SCC: Axial noncontrast CT through the neck (left image) in a patient presenting with hoarseness
demonstrates nodular thickening of the right false cord (yellow arrow) effacing the paraglottic fat. Subsequent
F-18 FDG PET shows uptake correlating to this nodule (yellow arrow) as well as uptake in a right level III lymph
node (red arrows) concerning for metastatic involvement.
Laryngeal SCC is the most common laryngeal malignancy.
Less common tumors of the larynx (such as lymphoma and chondrosarcoma) are submucosal and
therefore not visible on laryngoscopic exam.
The majority of laryngeal SCC arise from the glottis.
There are three staging schemes for laryngeal SCC, specific to the supraglottic, glottic, and
subglottic subsites.
Staging of the supraglottic SCC is dependent on the number of subsites of the supraglottis
that are described (listed above), vocal cord mobility, and involvement of adjacent
structures.
Neuro Head & Neck: 843