Differential diagnosis of cystic renal masses
Simple renal cyst (Bosniak category I)
Simple renal cysts are very common, found in approximately 50% of patients over age50. A simple renal cyst is an incidental lesion that requires no follow-up, even when
large.
A simple renal cyst should have the sonographic hallmarks of a simple cyst, featuring an
imperceptible thin wall, anechoic internal contents, and posterior through transmission.
Harmonic imaging can be helpful in confirming the diagnosis of simple renal cyst by
eliminating artifactual low-level internal echoes.
On CT, a simple cyst should attenuate close to 0 HU (and must be < 20 HU), not contain
any enhancing components, and have a thin imperceptible wall.
On MRI, a simple cyst must be hypointense on T1-weighted images, nyperintense on
T2-weighted images, and not contain any enhancing component.
Renal sinus cyst (category I)
Cysts in the renal sinus may be classified as parapelvic and peripelvic cysts.
A parapelvic cyst is a renal cortical cyst that herniates into the renal sinus and is usually
solitary. These cysts are usually large but solitary.
Peripelvic cysts are secondary to ymphatic obstruction and are often small and
multiple.
When multiple renal sinus cysts are present (usually peripelvic cysts), the appearance
may mimic hydronephrosis. In contrast to hydronephrosis, renal sinus cysts are not
contiguous with each other and will not contain excreted contrast on delayed imaging.
Hyperdense cyst (category II)
On ultrasound, a hemorrhagic cyst may contain low-level echoes or layers of echoes.
On noncontrast CT, hemorrhagic cysts are homogeneous and nyperattenuating (>70
HU). The main differential includes a proteinaceous cyst (debris).
Note that a hyperdense cyst cannot be diagnosed on postcontrast imaging alone
because it cannot be distinguished from an enhancing renal mass (unless dual energy
CT is used).
Renal abscess (category II and above)
A renal abscess is a contained purulent collection within the kidney. It is described in
the renal infection section.
Neoplasm (category IIF and above)
Cystic renal cell carcinoma: Although renal cell carcinoma most commonly presents as
a solid renal mass, it can also manifest as a complex cystic mass. Worrisome ultrasound
findings include thick septa, irregular wall thickening, and a mural nodule.
Multilocular cystic nephroma is a benign cystic neoplasm with enhancing septa
that occurs in a bimodal age distribution in baby boys and middle-aged women. A
characteristic but nonspecific feature is the propensity to herniate into the renal pelvis,
causing hydronephrosis.
In adults, multilocular cystic nephroma can be indistinguishable from cystic RCC.
In children, multilocular cystic nephroma can be indistinguishable from cystic Wilms tumor.
Mixed epithelial and stromal tumor (MEST) is a benign neoplasm composed of
epithelial and mesenchymal elements, typically found in middle-aged women. MEST
may appear as either a solid or cystic mass.
GU: 259