Sinonasal papilloma (continued)
Inverted and oncocytic papillomas have malignant potential, typically transforming to
squamous cell carcinoma, while exophytic papillomas do not.
Inverted and oncocytic papillomas typically arise from paranasal sinuses or the lateral nasal
wall, while exophytic papillomas tend to arise from the nasal septum.
Inverted papillomas classically show a convoluted cerebriform pattern on T2-weighted and
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR images (alternating curvilinear bands of high and low
signal intensity). At CT, bone erosion and remodeling are common, although the site of
attachment may demonstrate focal hyperostosis.
Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (JNA)
Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma: Axial contrast-enhanced CT through the pterygopalatine fossa in soft
tissue (left image) and bone windows shows an avidly enhancing mass in the left nasopharynx, pterygopalatine
fossa, and sphenoid sinus, with characteristic widening (arrows) of the pterygopalatine fossa. There is resultant
anterior displacement of the posterior wall of the maxillary sinus relative to the left (dotted blue line).
Case courtesy Sanjay Prabhu, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (JNA) is the most common benign neoplasm of the
nasopharynx and typically arises from the posterior aspect of the nasal cavity near the
sphenopalatine foramen.
While benign, JNA may be locally aggressive and, due to its vascularity, presents a risk for
life-threatening bleeding.
JNA almost always affects adolescent/young adult males, who present with epistaxis and/or
nasal obstruction.
On imaging, JNA shows intense contrast enhancement with a salt-and-pepper appearance
on MRI due to vascular flow voids. The mass can extend into the pterygopalatine fossa,
expanding it and anteriorly bowing the posterior maxillary sinus wall Holmon-Miler/ontro)
sign).
The most common arterial supply of JNA consists of distal internal maxillary artery branches.
Embolization is often performed to reduce lesion vascularity prior to resection.
Neuro Head & Neck: 762