Overview of named cervical spine fractures
3
C1:Jefferson fracture
axial force causes symmetrical fractures
of anterior and posterior arches
C2: odontoid fracture
type 1:distal dens (usually stable)
type 2: base ofthe dens (usually unstable)
type. 3: dens extending into C2 vertebral body
(variable, may be stable or unstable)
C2: hangman's fracture
hyperextension injury causes fracture ofthe arches ofC2
variable: flexion teardrop fracture
variable: clay-shoveler's fracture
most unstable cervical spine fracture
hyperflexion injury causes spinous process fracture
associated with disruption of
posterior vertebral and spinolaminar lines
Imaging in cervical spine trauma
Per the ACR appropriateness criteria for suspected spine trauma (last revised 2018), if the
patient (age 16 or greater) does not meet clinical criteria for imaging by NEXUS or CCR
(Canadian C-Spine Rules), then imaging of any modality is usually not appropriate. Of note,
there is no role for x-rays in "low energy" trauma if imaging is not indicated on clinical
grounds.
Ifi imaging is indicated by clinical criteria, then CT is the preferred initial imaging modality, as
CT is more sensitive and has largely supplanted radiographs for assessment of trauma.
MRI should be performed in patients with concern for spinal cord injury, cord compression,
or ligamentous injury. However, MRI is inferior to CT in identifying fractures and should
generally not be the initial imaging modality in trauma.
Subaxial injury classification and severity scale (SLICS)
The subaxial injury classification and severity scale (SLICS) provides points for three
categories of injury severity, including injury morphology, disruption of the discoligamentous
complex, and neurological status. Injuries with greater than 4 points are usually treated
surgically. It is not necessary to memorize this classification, but it is well established and
helpful to guide management.
Occipital condyle fractures
Occipital condyle fractures are uncommon and typically classified into three patterns.
Type I (stable) is a nondisplaced comminuted impaction fracture from axial loading.
Type II (stable) is a linear skull fracture extending into the occipital condyle.
Type III (unstable) is distraction injury resulting in an avulsion fracture at attachment of the
alar ligament, which is disrupted or incompetent. This is the most common fracture type.
MRI is an important adjunct to determine stability and ligament integrity, and can help
differentiate between a type I fracture and a minimally displaced type III avulsion fracture.
Spine: 899