Anatomy of the pterygopalatine fossa (continued)
The pterygopalatine fossae are inverted pyramid-shaped spaces in the deep face that are
important central stations for the spread of disease between the facial skull and middle
cranial fossa.
The pterygopalatine fossa contains fat and neurovascular structures including the
pterygopalatine ganglion, maxillary nerve (cranial nerve V,) branches, and distal maxillary
artery branches.
Anteriorly, the pterygopalatine fossa is bordered by the maxillary sinus.
Posteriorly, the pterygopalatine fossa is bordered by the base of the pterygoid plates of the
sphenoid bone, through which the foramen rotundum and Vidian canal are routes to the
middle cranial fossa. The former carries the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve (V,),
while the latter carries the Vidian nerve (nerve of the pterygoid canal).
Superiorly, the inferior orbital fissure is the base of the pyramid that opens anteriorly into
the orbit. It transmits the infraorbital nerve, among other structures.
Laterally, the pterygomaxillary fissure is the exit to the masticator sace or infratemporal
fossa.
Medially, the sphenopalatine foramen is the exit to the superior meatus of the nasal cavity.
It transmits the sphenopalatine artery, among other structures.
Inferiorly, the pterygopalatine canal is the apex of the pyramid that leads to the oral cavity
via the greater and lesser palatine foramina. They transmit the greater and lesser palatine
nerves and vessels.
Pterygopalatine fossa pathology
The pterygopalatine fossa can be involved with neoplastic or inflammatory entities by direct
invasion or perineural spread.
Primary sites include the cheek (e.g., squamous cell carcinoma), maxillary sinus (e.g., invasive fungal
sinusitis), nasal cavity and nasopharynx (e.g., juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma, nasopharyngeal
carcinoma), palate (e.g., adenoid cystic carcinoma), masticator space (e.g., habdomyosarcoma), or orbit
(e.g., idiopathic orbital inflammation).
Oblteraton/mnltration of the fat of the pterygopalatine fossa with soft tissue is the earliest
imaging sign of its pathological involvement. Later signs are widening or erosion of the bony
walls.
Contrast enhancement and enlargement of the neural foramina/canals leading to the
pterygopalatine fossa indicate perineural tumor spread.
Neuro Head & Neck: 808