Gastroschisis (continued)
Gastroschisis is a paraumbilical (usually right-sided) anterior abdominal wall defect, through
which bowel herniates without a peritoneal covering. Gastroschisis is the second most
common abdominal wall defect.
Unlike omphalocele, gastroschisis is usually seen as an isolated anomaly.
Gastroschisis is seen more commonly in very young (teenage) mothers and smokers,
possibly related to a vascular insult.
Prognosis is dependent on the degree of bowel injury.
Pentalogy of Cantrell
Pentalogy of Cantrell is a rare disorder consisting of ectopia cordis (extra-thoracic heart),
omphalocele, diaphragmatic defect, pericardial defect, and disruption of the sternum.
FETAL GENITOURINARY
Although oligohydramnios may be due to many causes, the complete genitourinary (GU)
tract (kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra) should be carefully evaluated in every fetus
with oligohydramnios.
Oligohydramnios due to a fetal GU malformation can be divided into three categories:
Fetal hydronephrosis (obstructive uropathy).
Cystic renal disease.
Bilateral renal agenesis.
If the fetal bladder is not visualized (an empty bladder is not visible on ultrasound) the cause
of oligohydramnios is likely a renal anomaly, such as:
Bilateral multicystic dysplastic kidneys.
Bilateral renal agenesis.
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD).
Normal fetal kidneys grow approximately 1 mm per week of gestation. For instance, a
20-week fetus should have kidneys approximately 2 cm in length.
Fetal hydronephrosis overview
Coronal fetal ultrasound shows bilateral
hydronephrosis, severe on the right (arrows). This
fetus has trisomy 18, which is associated with
hydronephrosis.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf MD, Diagnostic
Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Screening for fetal hydronephrosis is routinely performed to evaluate for potentially
treatable causes, such as obstruction or reflux, which may lead to progressive childhood
kidney damage if undiagnosed.
The anterior-posterior renal pelvis diameter (APRPD) is measured to assess for
hydronephrosis. The accepted range of normal depends on gestational age. Less than 4 mm
is always normal.
Obstetrics: 361