INTRODUCTION TO BI-RADS
Overview
The breast imaging and reporting data system (BI-RADS) is a system for standardizing
mammography, ultrasound, and MRI reports that incorporates a strict lexicon, structured
reporting, and clearly defined assessment categories. This text adheres to the terminology
of the fifth edition of the BI-RADS atlas, which was released in 2013.
All mammographic, ultrasound, and breast MRI findings and reports should closely adhere
to the BI-RADS lexicon and assessment categories.
Structure of the mammographic report
1) History and indication for examination with patient risk factors stated.
. 2) List of comparison studies.
3) Description of the overall breast composition, using the following categories:
The breasts are almost entirely fatty.
There are scattered areas of fibroglandular density.
The breasts are heterogeneously dense, which may obscure small masses.
The breasts are extremely dense, which lowers the sensitivity of mammography.
4) A clear description of any significant findings, including location.
5) Overall impression, with BI-RADS assessment category and course of action when
appropriate.
Almost always, the course of action will be concordant with the BI-RADs assessment category. However,
the fifth edition of BI-RADS allows the course of action to be separated from the assessment category in
certain clinical situations. For example, the aspiration of a simple cyst designated as BI-RADS 2 to relieve
patient pain. Additionally, a clinically suspected breast abscess or hematoma may be given a designation
of BI-RADS 4, with the biopsy deferred for one month pending a repeat diagnostic evaluation.
BI-RADS ASSESSMENT CATEGORIES
Category 0: Need additional imaging
Additional imaging evaluation (such as spot compression, magnification, special
mammographic views, or ultrasound) and/or prior mammograms are necessary before a
final assessment can be assigned.
Category 0 is only appropriate for screening. All diagnostic mammography must conclude
with a final assessment from 1-6.
Category 1: Negative
Breasts are normal.
Category 2: Benign
A finding that is described but is definitely benign is BI-RADS 2.
No additional workup or follow-up is needed.
Examples: Vascular or other typically benign calcifications, simple breast cysts,
intramammary lymph nodes.
Breast: 373