MALIGNANT (OR POTENTIALLY MALIGNANT) ADRENAL MASSES
Pheochromorytoma: Potentially malignant
Pheochromocytoma: Contrast-enhanced axial (left image) and coronal (right image) CT shows al large,
heterogeneous mass (arrows) with central necrosis arising superior to the left kidney. The extra-renal origin is
best appreciated on the coronal image.
A pheochromocytoma (intra-adrenal paraganglioma), is a neuroendocrine tumor that typically
originates from the adrenal medulla. heochromocytomas are composed of chromaffin
cells that secrete catecholamines and can cause uncontrolled secondary hypertension and
episodic headaches/diaphoress: Approximately 90% of these tumors are benign.
Pheochromocytomas can be large and heterogeneous due to areas of necrosis, hemorrhage,
and occasionally calcification. On CT, they demonstrate avid enhancement. On MRI, they
demonstrate marked T2 hyperintensity (light bulb sign) and avid enhancement with variable
washout kinetics.
Nuclear medicine lodine-123 MIBG or Indium-111 pentetreotide scintigraphy, Gallium-68
DOTATATE PET/CT, or contrast-enhanced MRI can be used for detection of extra-adrenal
pheochromocytoma, such as in the context of metastatic workup in patients with hereditary
conditions that increase risk of developing pheochromocytoma (see below).
neochromocytoma/paraganglomas are associated with several syndromes:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A and 2B: Typically bilateral intra-adrenal pheochromocytomas.
von Hippel-Lindau.
Neurofibromatosis type 1.
Carney's triad (gastric leiomyosarcoma, pulmonary chondroma, and paragangliomas)
Hereditary paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma syndrome: SDHD gene mutation, paragangliomas and
pheochromocytomas (50% risk of malignant pheochromocytomas.
The most common site of an extra-adrenal paraganglioma is the organ of Zuckerkandi,
located along the aortic bifurcation to the level of the bladder. Although rare, when the
bladder is involved, it can produce a distinctive clinical presentation of post-micturition
syncope (syncope after urination).
Paragangliomas of the head and neck are generally called glomus tumors and may be
associated with the tympanic membrane (glomus tympanicum), the jugular foramen
(glomus jugulare), the carotid body (called a carotid body tumor), or the vagus nerve
(glomus vagale).
GU: 238