Category 3: Probably benign
A finding placed in BI-RADS 3 should have <2% risk of malignancy.
It is necessary to conduct a complete diagnostic imaging evaluation using diagnostic views
(e.g., spot compression magnification, etc.) and/or ultrasound before assigning a probably
benign (BI-RADS 3) assessment. BI-RADS 3 is never appropriate for screening mammography.
Three specific mammographic findings that may be appropriate for a BI-RADS 3 designation
after complete diagnostic assessment include a circumscribed solid mass, focal asymmetry,
and a single group of punctate calcifications.
BI-RADS 3 should generally be reserved for baseline exams. If a comparison is available and
a finding is new or increased but otherwise meets criteria for a probably benign assessment,
then biopsy is usually appropriate. BI-RADS 3 is generally not supported for palpable lesions,
although there are single institution studies suggesting that it is acceptable to assign
appropriate palpable lesions as BI-RADS 3 after a full imaging workup.
Action required: Short interval follow-up, typically 6 months. After 12 months of stability it
is acceptable to lengthen the follow-up interval to one year. In general, if a benign-appearing
lesion demonstrates two to three years of stability it can be considered benign (BI-RADS 2).
Any interval change is suspicious and may warrant biopsy.
Category 4: Suspicious
Findings are suspicious of malignancy, with a probability of being malignant >2% and <95%.
Category 4 can be subdivided into Category 4A, 4B, and 4C, with 4A being least suspicious,
and 4C being most suspicious.
Action required: Biopsy.
Category 5: Highly suggestive of malignancy
These lesions have a high probability (>95%) of being cancer. A lesion that a radiologist
describes as "I'II eat my hat if that's not cancer!" should be classified as BI-RADS 5. The
prototypical BI-RADS 5 cancer would be an irregular mass with spiculated margins and
associated fine pleomorphic/fine linear-branching calcifications.
Action required: Biopsy. Any pathologic result other than cancer would be discordant.
Category 6: Known biopsy-proven malignancy
This category is reserved for lesions identified on the imaging study with prior biopsy proof
of malignancy. Typically, a plan of action is already in place.
Breast: 374