Mesentery (continued)
The three true mesenteries are:
Small bowel mesentery: Supplies both the jejunum and ileum. Oriented obliquely from the ligament of
Treitz in the left upper quadrant to the ileocecal junction in the right lower quadrant.
Transverse mesocolon: Mesentery to the transverse colon, connecting the posterior transverse colon to
the posterior abdominal wall
Sigmoid mesentery: Mesentery to the sigmoid colon.
The transverse mesocolon divides the peritoneal cavity into supra-mesocolic and infra-
mesocolic compartments, the latter of which is divided into right and left infracolic recesses
by the root of the small bowel mesentery.
Omentum
The greater and lesser omentum are specialized mesenteries that attach to the stomach.
The greater and lesser omentum do not connect to the posterior abdominal wall.
Greater omentum: Large, drape-like mesentery in the anterior abdomen, which connects the stomach to
the anterior aspect of the transverse colon.
Lesser omentum: Connects stomach to liver.
Flow of peritoneal fluid
Peritoneal fluid is constantly produced, circulated, and finally reabsorbed around the
diaphragm, where it eventually drains into the thoracic duct.
Peritoneal fluid preferentially travels in certain directions generally from the pelvis into the
upper abdomen via the paracolic gutters (right over left) and pools in dependent recesses
including the retrouterine female/retrovesical (male) recess, along the superior portion of
the sigmoid mesocolon, the ileocolic region (root of the small bowel mesentery), the right
paracolic gutter and in Morrison's pouch. As a result, these regions are the most prone to
involvement of peritoneal and serosal metastases. Flow is limited anatomically in some
locations like the falciform ligament on the right and the phrenicocolic ligament on the left.
"MISTY" MESENTERY
Overview of the "misty" mesentery
As previously discussed, the abdominal mesenteries are fatty folds covered by peritoneum
through which the arterial supply and venous and ymphatic drainage of the bowel run.
The mesenteries themselves are not seen on CT because they are made primarily of fat and
blend in with intra-abdominal fat. However, the vessels which course through the mesentery
are normally seen.
Infiltration of the mesentery by fluid, inflammatory cells, tumor, or fibrosis may increase the
attenuation of the mesentery and cause the mesenteric vasculature to appear indistinct.
These findings are often the first clue to certain pathologies.
Mesenteric edema
Edema of the mesentery may be secondary to either systemic or intra-abdominal etiologies.
Systemic causes of edema include congestive heart failure, low protein states, and third-
spacing, all of which can lead to diffuse mesenteric edema.
Focal mesenteric edema may be secondary to an intra-abdominal vascular cause, such
as mesenteric vessel thrombosis, Budd-Chiari syndrome, or IVC obstruction. Abdominal
vascular insults may cause bowel ischemia, which manifest on imaging as bowel wall
thickening, pneumatosis, or mesenteric venous gas.
GI: 223