Subclavian artery compression due to TOS
Compression of the subclavian artery clinically presents with hand or finger pain, numbness,
paresthesias, or coolness.
Adson's maneuver is a test for subclavian artery compression at the thoracic outlet. First,
the radial artery is palpated in neutral position. Then, the patient's head is turned to the
contralateral side while they inhale. In arterial thoracic outlet syndrome, the radial pulse will
be reduced with this maneuver.
A mechanical compression is almost always present and is exaggerated during
hyperabduction. Over 70% of patients with subclavian artery compression have a cervical
rib. Other causes of subclavian artery compression include an accessory scalene muscle
(scalenus minimus), enlargement of the anterior scalene muscle, and well-developed
musculature.
Potential complications include arterial mural thrombus, aneurysm, and distal embolization.
The hands should always be evaluated for signs of distal emboli.
The preferred treatment of subclavian artery compression is surgical thoracic outlet
decompression (e.g., resection of a cervical rib) and repair of the subclavian artery if an
aneurysm is present.
Endovascular arterial thrombolysis may be performed concurrently, weighed against the risk
for distal embolization.
Subclavian vein compression due to TOS Paget-Schroetter syndrome)
Subclavian vein compression is common
during hyperabduction; however
associated upper limb swelling and pain
suggest clinically significant stenosis.
Compression of the subclavian vein
without thrombosis is also known as
McCleery syndrome.
Paget-Schroetter syndrome is thrombosis
(i.e., effort thrombosis) of the subclavian
vein as it enters the thorax and is usually
seen in muscular young men. Chronic
compression causes intimal hyperplasia,
which leads to subclavian vein thrombosis.
Paget-Schroetter syndrome clinically
presents with upper-extremity swelling or
Coronal contrast-enhanced MR venography with arms
pain worsened with effort.
abducted demonstrates right subclavian vein thrombus
Stents should generally not be used,
(arrow). The MRI did not demonstrate a mechanical cause
especially if there is a mechanical
for the thrombosis.
obstruction, due to high risk of device
Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD, Brigham and Women's
failure.
Hospital.
During diagnostic venography, it is necessary to evaluate the arm both in neutral position
and abducted.
CTA and MRA can diagnose thrombosed subclavian vein as a filling defect. Both sides should
be evaluated. Frequently, both subclavian veins are compressed, even if only one side is
symptomatic.
Depending on the chronicity of disease, treatment is thrombolysis followed by surgical
thoracic outlet decompression.
Vascular: 577