Mommogrophieguided stereotactic core biopsy (continued)
Adequate local anesthesia is administered to the dermis and along the expected path of the
biopsy needle (without imaging guidance) and a small skin incision is sometimes made at
the biopsy needle entrance site (biopsy needles typically have extremely sharp tips and can
be directly advanced through the skin).
A vacuum-assisted biopsy needle (7- to 12-gauge options are available) is employed, and
appropriate positioning is confirmed on the horizontal (x), vertical (y), and depth (z) axes.
After the samples are obtained, the specimen must be radiographed to confirm that the
targeted calcifications are present.
Once the presence of calcification is confirmed in the sample, a marker clip is placed,
and post-procedure two-view mammograms are obtained to confirm clip position. Often,
small calcifications will be completely removed by the vaçuum-assisted biopsy and correct
position of the clip is essential if the lesion requires subsequent surgical treatment.
lomosynthesis-guided stereotactic core biopsy
Compared to traditional 2D mammographyguided stereotactic biopsy, tomosynthesis-
guided core biopsy has the advantages of easier user operation, faster targeting given
no need for the paired 15 stereo views, and facilitates the biopsy of asymmetries, focal
asymmetries, or architectural distortions.
One disadvantage is that subtle calcifications may be difficult to visualize on tomosynthesis
images, which may necessitate conversion to a 2D mammography/guided stereotactic
biopsy.
Apart from the elimination of the paired stereo views, tomosynthesis-guided core biopsy
follows similar steps to its 2D mammographic counterpart.
MRI-guided biopsy
MRi images obtained during an MRI-guided biopsy. Post-contrast image through the mid breast (left image)
shows thei targeted abnormal enhancement (arrows). The lesion is not very conspicuous because the patient
had to be repositioned and delayed parenchymal enhancement partially obscures the lesion. The image on the
right shows the grid applied to the lateral breast, and the star marks the position of the targeted lesion on the
grid. Note that despite the sagittal orientation of these images, the patient is positioned prone.
Breast: 441