SUPRATENTORIAL CORTICAL GLIAL/NEURONAL TUMORS
Overview
In addition to lgodendrogiomas, there are several rare, low-grade primary neoplasms
of glial, neuronal, or mixed glial-neuronal lineage that are predominantly centered in the
superficial cerebrum.
The supratentorial cortical tumors can be remembered with the acronym P-DOG MD:
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA).
Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET).
Oligodendroglioma.
Ganglioglioma.
Multinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumor (MVNT).
Desmoplastic infantile astrocytoma and ganglioglioma (DIA/DIG).
These tumors carry a better prognosis and occur at a younger age than diffuse gliomas.
Due to cortical involvement, these patients most often present with seizures.
Slow-growing cortical tumors can cause scalloping/remodeling of the inner table of the
calvarium. Extensive vasogenic edema is uncommon, consistent with their low-grade
behavior.
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA)
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma:
Axial T2-weighted (left image) and
post-contrast T1-weighted (right
image) MRI shows a large right
temporal, predominantly cystic
mass. The mass has enhancing
nodularity laterally (red arrow).
The overlying dura is thickened and
enhancing (yellow arrow). There is
relatively little surrounding edema
given the large size of the lesion.
Case courtesy Raymond Huang, MD
and David Lee, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) is a WHO grade 2 astrocytic tumor. A more
aggressive variant is the anaplastic PXA (grade 3).
PXAs usually present in children or young adults.
The majority of PXAS carry the BRAF V600E targetable mutation.
PXA is most commonly located in the temporal lobe (half of cases), involving the cortex and
leptomeninges.
On MRI, PXA is an avidly enhancing mass often associated with cyst formation and a
hickened/ennancing pial tail.
Aside from PXA, the main differential for a cortical solid and cystic lesion in this age group is
ganglioglioma. Although uncommon, hemorrhage is more likely with PXA.
Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET)
Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET) is a WHO grade 1 glioneuronal tumor.
DNETS usually present in children or young adults.
DNET is most commonly located in the temporal lobe (1/2 to 2/3 of cases), involving the
cortex. They are found less commonly in the frontal lobe, basal ganglia, or brainstem.
Neuro Brain: 712