IODINATED CONTRAST MEDIA
Types of iodinated contrast
There are two types of iodinated contrast media: ionic and nonionic (organic).
lonic compounds were developed first, and commonly used agents include diatrizoate
(Gastrografin).
Nonionic organic compounds covalently bind the iodine and do not dissociate into
component molecules, thus they typically have fewer side effects. Commonly used nonionic
agents include iopamidol (Isovue 370) and iohexol (Omnipaque 140, 180, 240, 300, 350).
The higher the iodine concentration, the more dense it will appear with X-ray exposure.
The agents are clear, water soluble solutions that are renally excreted and can be used for
intravascular, intrathecal and oral or body cavity administration.
CONTRASTF-RELATIVE KIDNEY INJURY
Post-contrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI)
Post-contrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI) is a decrease in renal function within 48 hours
following intravascular (venous or arterial) administration of iodinated contrast.
PC-AKI is a general entity that may result from any nephrotoxic process, including exposure
to iodinated contrast (CIN, described below) or an unrelated cause.
Contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN)
Contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) is a decrease in renal function caused by intravascular
administration of iodinated contrast. Its exact pathophysiology is unclear.
Recent studies show that CIN occurs much less commonly than previously thought.
The most important risk factor for development of CIN is pre-existing renal insufficiency.
In patients with eGFR 245 ml/min/1.73m*, intravascular iodinated contrast is not an independent risk
factor of AKI.
Even in patients with eGFR 230 and <45, the development of CIN is exceptionally rare.
An eGFR <30 is the most commonly used threshold for stratifying CIN risk.
Note that gadolinium-based contrast media are not known to cause CIN.
Prevention of contrast nephropathy
The main preventative strategies against CIN are to use the minimal dose of contrast
possible and to adequately hydrate the patient (intravenous hydration is more effective).
The use of sodium bicarbonate and N-acetylcysteine has been previously advocated but the effectiveness
of these agents has not been proven.
Administration of intravenous contrast to a patient with an eGFR <30 would require a careful
assessment of risks and benefits on a case-by-case basis.
The standard dose of intravenous iodinated contrast can generally be given to patients with
end-stage renal disease on chronic dialysis. Careful attention should be paid to the volume
status in these patients as theoretically the osmotic load increases intravascular volume.
IODINATED INTRAVENOUS CONTRAST: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
lodinated contrast and pheochromocytoma
It is safe to administer nonionic contrast media to patients with pheochromocytoma. Prior
studies showed an increased in serum catecholamines after high-osmolality contrast agents,
which are no longer in current use.
Physics: 1199