Hirschsprung disease
Hirschsprung disease: Frontal (left image) and lateral (right image) spot radiographs from a contrast enema
show a narrowed rectum, which has a smaller diameter than the sigmoid colon.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD and Carlo Buonomo, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Hirschsprung disease is aganglionosis of the distal bowel, resulting in failed relaxation of
the involved bowel and subsequent bowel obstruction. It is caused by arrest of the normal
craniocaudal proximal-to-distal) migration of vagal neural crest cells to the distal bowel
wall. The anus is therefore always affected, and the involved bowel is continuous as it
extends proximally.
Hirschsprung disease typically presents in newborn males who fail to have a bowel
movement after 48-72 hours, and have forceful passage of meconium after rectal exam.
Hirschsprung disease ranges in severity from isolated internal anal sphincter involvement
(ultrashort segment) to involvement of the entire colon (very rare, approximately 1-3% of
cases, and typically genetic).
Up to 1/3 of cases of Hirschsprung develop a form of enterocolitis similar to necrotizing
enterocolitis, with toxic megacolon being the fulminant form. It is therefore important to
consider Hirschsprung in a neonate with bowel obstruction and colitis.
Multiple congenital anomalies are associated with Hirschsprung disease. Five percent have
trisomy 21, but the association with Down syndrome is less compared to duodenal atresia.
Radiography of Hirschsprung disease shows distal bowel obstruction pattern.
Contrast enema typically shows a gradual cone-shaped transition zone at the junction of the
spastic, narrowed distal colon and the dilated proximal colon, best seen on the lateral view.
A: sawtooth appearance to the rectum may sometimes be seen, representing irregular contractions in the
aganglionic segment.
The rectum normally has a larger diameter than the sigmoid. When Hirschsprung involves the rectum, the
rectum will be in spasm and the sigmoid will be dilated, caused by an abnormal rectosigmoid index (ratio
of rectal to sigmoid diameter) less than 1.
In contrast to functional immaturity of the colon, Hirschsprung disease tends to cause a
tapered, rather than an abrupt, transition zone.
e Definitive diagnosis is with suction biopsy of the bowel wall. Treatment is surgical.
Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome
Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome is a rare congenital loss of
bladder and bowel smooth muscle function causing absent intestinal peristalsis, microcolon,
and distended non-obstructed urinary bladder. It is usually fatal.
Peds: 1135