Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a systemic disease characterized by extracellular deposition of insoluble
proteins; any organ can be affected. Cardiac involvement pertains a poor prognosis and can
lead to angina, arrhythmias, restrictive cardiomyopathy, and heart failure. Transthyretin
cardiac amyloidosis formed from misfolded transthyretin protein is now recognized as a
common cause of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction in elderly (senile amyloidosis
subtype).
While the gold standard for diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis is tissue biopsy, cardiac
imaging such as MRI (discussed later in the chapter) and nuclear imaging offer noninvasive
alternatives.
Radiotracers most commonly used to image cardiac amyloidosis are Tc-99m-labeled
bisphosphonates traditionally developed for bone scintigraphy. These agents are helpful
in distinguishing between subtypes of amyloidosis, where transthyretin amyloid (senile
and hereditary subtypes) takes up more radiotracer than light-chain (AL) amyloid. The
mechanism of uptake is not clearly understood.
Grade 2 (myocardial uptake = rib uptake) or grade 3 (myocardial uptake > rib uptake) myocardial uptake of
Tc-99m bisphosphonate tracers on SPECT is nearly 100% specific for the diagnosis of transthyretin cardiac
amyloidosis if light-chain amyloidosis is excluded.
Patient with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and increasing left ventricular wall thickening
on echocardiogram despite well controlled hypertension: Coronal and sagittal planar images obtained
three hours afteri injection of 20 mCi of Tc-99m pyrophosphate demonstrated grade 3 myocardial uptake
of radiotracer (myocardial uptake > rib uptake) which was confirmed on SPECT (not shown). If serum and
urine immunofixation electrophoresis and serum free light chain assay are negative (which exclude light
chain amyloidosis), these findings would be consistent with transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis.
Amyloid-specific PET agents (such as F-18 florbetapir and C-11 PiB) are currently undergoing
investigation for imaging of cardiac amyloidosis.
Cardiac: 499