BENIGN MYOMETRIAL PATHOLOGY
Adenomyosis
Adenomyosis refers to ectopic endometrial tissue within the myometrium (endometriosis
interna). In contrast to endometriosis, the ectopic endometrial tissue seen in adenomyosis is
nonfunctioning, and it does not respond to cyclic ovarian hormones.
Most patients are asymptomatic. But classic clinical presentation includes dysmenorrhea,
menorrhagia, dyspareunia, infertility, and chronic pelvic pain.
Ultrasound shows an enlarged uterus with heterogeneous myometrium, without focal
mass. Multiple subendometrial cysts or echogenic foci can be found. There is often loss of
differentiation of the ndometra-myometia junction.
On MRI, adenomyosis is best seen on T2-weighted images as diffuse (or focal) thickening
of the junctional zone (>12 mm), often associated with multiple small T2 hyperintense foci.
Borderline thickening of the junctional zone (8-12 mm) may be due to adenomyosis, but not
diagnostic.
Focal adenomyosis may mimic leiomyoma, appearing as more focal T1 and T2 hypointense
signal. Although imaging features may overlap, leiomyomas typically show well-defined
margins, no relationship to the junctional zone, mass effect (lobular external uterine
contour), and more homogeneous T2 hypointense signal.
junctional zone
Adenomyosis: Sagittal (left) and axial T2 MRI of the uterus shows a markedly thickened junctional zone
containing numerous T2 hyperintense foci.
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Fibroid (leiomyoma)
Fibroids are extremely common benign tumors of smooth muscle seen in 25% of white
women, 50% of black women over age 30, and 40% of reproductive-age women.
Al lipoleiomyoma is a variant of fibroid which contains fat and is echogenic on US.
Fibroids can be found in several locations:
Intramural: located within the myometrium; most common location.
Submucosal: directly underneath the endometrial mucosa and may bulge into the endometrial canal.
A submucosal fibroid can be resected hysteroscopically if >50% of the fibroid is intraluminal.
Ani intracavitary fibroid is a variant which is located nearly entirely within the endometrial cavity.
Subserosal: directly underneath the outer uterine serosa. A subserosal fibroid may simulate an adnexal
mass if pedunculated, but Doppler will show blood supply coming from the uterus.
Cervical: rare, may: simulate cervical cancer.
The typical ultrasound appearance of a fibroid is a slightly neterogeneous, hypoechoic
uterine mass with linear bands of shadowing.
Calcification is often seen.
May undergo cystic degeneration and appear as an anechoic mass with posterior through-transmission.
GU: 307