Epidermoid cyst
Epidermoid cyst:
Axial T2-weighted MRI (top left image) shows a
lobulated mass (arrows) in the left cerebellopontine
angle. The mass is isointense to CSF.
ADC map (top right image) and DWI (left image)
show that the mass (arrows) is dark on ADC and
bright on DWI, consistent with reduced diffusivity.
Case courtesy Gregory Wrubel, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
An epidermoid cyst is a congenital lesion arising from ectopic ectodermal epithelial tissue.
Epidermoid cysts progressively enlarge from desquamation of keratinized epithelium lining
the cyst. The mass characteristically insinuates in between structures, encasing cranial
nerves and vessels. Gross pathology features a characteristic cauliflower-like" surface.
On CT, epidermoid cyst may mimic arachnoid cyst and appear as a CSF-attenuation cystic
structure. On MRI, an epidermoid cyst has similar signal characteristics as CSF on T1- and T2-
weighted images. Unlike arachnoid cyst, an epidermoid does not usually suppress on FLAIR
sequences.
An epidermoid cyst is hyperintense on diffusion-weighted images, believed to be a
combination of reduced diffusivity and T2 shine through, in contrast to arachnoid cysts.
Post-surgical DWI follow-up is critical to detect any residual focus, which will be DWI bright.
Rarely, epidermoids may exhibit signal hyperintensity on unenhanced T1-weighted imaging,
also known as "white epidermoids."
Intra-axial neoplasm
Less frequent benign lesions that can be seen in the IAC/CPA include lipomas and dermoids.
A posterior fossa intra-axial neoplasm, such as a nemangioplastoma or glioma, may invade
laterally into the CPA. Other malignancies such as lymphoma, melanoma, and metastases
can also be rarely seen.
Medulloblastoma tends to occur in the midline in children, though lateral involvement of
the cerebellar hemispheres can be seen in older children or young adults.
Ependymoma may extend into the CPA by squeezing through the lateral fourth ventricular
foramina (of Luschka).
Tumors related to the petrous bone (e.g., chondrosarcoma or endolymphatic sac tumors)
may extend to the CPA.
Neuro Head & Neck: 828