MALIGNANT HEPATIC MASSES
Pathway to hepatocellular carcinoma
Regenerative nodule
Dysplastic nodule with
increased size, cellularity,
and atypia (blue)
Focus of HCC (red) in
the dysplastic nodule
Large HCC with poorly
differentiated cells (purple)
and increased neovascularity
Small HCC with
neovascularity
In the setting of cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is thought to develop in a
sequence from regenerative nodule * dysplastic nodule * HCC. Regenerative and
dysplastic nodules cannot be reliably differentiated on imaging. High-grade dysplastic
nodules cannot be reliably differentiated from wel-differentiated HCC.
Regenerative nodule: A regenerative nodule is completely supplied by the portal vein and is
not premalignant. A regenerative nodule should not enhance in the arterial phase.
Most regenerative nodules show low signal intensity on T2-weighted images, with variable signal intensity
on T1-weighted images. Rarely, a regenerative nodule may be hyperintense on T1-weighted images due to
glycogen deposition.
On contrast-enhanced MRI, most regenerative nodules enhance to the same (or slightly less) degree as the
adjacent hepatic parenchyma.
Dysplastic nodule: Unlike a regenerative nodule, a dysplastic nodule is premalignant.
However, most dysplastic nodules do not demonstrate arterial phase enhancement (unless
high grade), since blood supply is still from the portal vein.
Dysplastic nodules are variable in signal intensity on T1-weighted images. Most dysplastic nodules are
hypointense on T2-weighted images, although high-grade dysplastic nodules may be T2 hyperintense.
Contrast-enhanced MRI shows low-grade dysplastic nodules to be isoenhancing relative to liver and thus
indistinguishable from regenerative nodules. High-grade dysplastic nodules can demonstrate arterial
enhancement and may be indistinguishable from well-differentiated HCC.
A: siderotic nodule is an iron-rich regenerative or dysplastic nodule. A siderotic nodule
is hypointense on T1 and T2*-weighted images (including in-phase GRE images) and
hyperattenuating on CT. A siderotic nodule is rarely, if ever, malignant.
GI: 105