Oil cyst (fat necrosis; continued)
Mammography will demonstrate a circumscribed, lucent lesion that can peripherally calcify.
When the mammographic appearance is diagnostic, ultrasound is not necessary, but will
show a round or oval circumscribed mass. The entire spectrum of internal echogenicities are
possible: anechoic, hypoechoic, hyperechoic, complex cystic and solid, or heterogeneous. If
the wall of the oil cyst is fibrotic or calcified, there may be posterior acoustic shadowing.
On MRI, an oil cyst will demonstrate internal fat signal, and may have rim enhancement.
FAT-CONTAINING CIRCUMSCRIBED MASSES
Like purely fatty masses, all fat-containing circumscribed masses are benign (BI-RADS 2).
Hamartoma fibroadenolipoma)
AL
Mammogram (left image) demonstrates an oval mass containing fat and glandular elements, surrounded by a
thin pseudocapsule (arrows). Ultrasound of the same area demonstrates an oval, heterogeneous echotexture
hypoechoic and hyperechoic mass with circumscribed margins (calipers).
A hamartoma, also known as a fibroadenolipoma, is a benign mass containing fat and
glandular tissue elements. It is often described as a "breast within a breast" as it is
composed of the same elements as the normal breast, but in a focal area demarcated by a
pseudocapsule.
The classic mammographic appearance is an oval mass of mixed soft tissue and fat density
with circumscribed margins. The surrounding pseudocapsule may be visible as a thin
radiodense line when fat inside the lesion and outside the lesion are adjacent.
Mammography is almost always diagnostic, but familiarity with the ultrasound appearance
is important as it may be the first exam performed in younger patients presenting with a
palpable hamartoma. At ultrasound, a hamartoma will be seen as an oval circumscribed
heterogeneous echotexture (mixed hypoechoic and hyperechoic) lesion with a subtle thin
echogenic pseudocapsule.
Because fibroglandular elements are present within a hamartoma, it is possible (but rare)
for breast cancer to occur within a hamartoma. Any suspicious mass or calcifications within
a hamartoma should be worked up.
Galactocele
A galactocele is a cystic collection of milk that can present as a palpable mass in a lactating
woman.
On mammography, a galactocele typically appears as an oval mass with circumscribed
margins. This may be soft tissue density, fat density or mixed density with a fat-fluid level. If
a palpable mass in a lactating patient is fat density or has a fat-fluid level it is benign.
Breast: 413