True left ventricular (LV) aneurysm (continued)
True ventricular aneurysms are associated with wall motion dyskinesia but they rarely
rupture. Management is medical.
A mural thrombus may form over time due to slow flow within the aneurysm.
LV aneurysm: 4 chamber bright-blood
imaging demonstrates ballooning of
the LV apex (arrows) and thinning of
the anterior LV wall in keeping with
true aneurysm.
Pseudoaneurysm
A cardiac pseudoaneurysm is a contained ventricular rupture, with only pericardial
adhesions preventing a complete rupture. There is no myocardium in the wall of a
pseudoaneurysm.
Pseudoaneurysms are associated with occlusion of the circumflex or right coronary arteries
and most commonly occur along the inferior, inferolateral or posterior wall of the LV.
Plain film findings suggestive of a LV pseudoaneurysm include a retrocardiac density seen
on the frontal view and an abnormal posterior contour on the lateral radiograph. CT or
MRI shows a narrow aneurysmal neck. The affected region is akinetic and the overlying
pericardium often demonstrates LGE on MRI.
Ventricular pseudoaneurysms may rupture. An increase in size over sequential films is
especially worrisome for impending rupture. Treatment of a pseudoaneurysm is surgical.
Dressler syndrome
Dressler syndrome is a subacute immune-mediated pericarditis which often occurs 2-6
weeks following MI. It is manifests as pericardial and pleural effusions.
NON-ISCHEMIC MYOCARDIAL DISEASE
Catecholamine induced (Takotsubo) ardiomyopathy
Catecholamine induced cardiomyopathy, also known as takotsubo cardiomyopathy and
broken heart syndrome, can clinically mimic acute myocardial infarction.
Typically affecting older women in the setting of acute emotional stress, catecholamine-
induced cardiomyopathy can present with chest pain, abnormal ECG, and elevation of
cardiac enzymes. Cardiac catheterization is normal.
One theory is that men may suffer catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy as well but typically don't
survive. There may be a protective effect of estrogen.
Catecholamine-indured cardiomyopathy is typically self-limited.
On cardiac MRI or coronary CT, there is a characteristic ballooning of the cardiac apex. The
shape of the heart is similar to a Japanese octopus pot, hence the name takotsubo. There is
no abnormal delayed enhancement on MRI.
Cardiac: 524