Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH; continued)
Most cases are isolated, although a prominent minority of fetuses have other anomalies,
most commonly congenital heart disease.
By far the most common location for CDH is the left posterior thorax, termed a Bochdalek
hernia (mnemonic: "back to the left"). A Bochdalek hernia frequently displaces the heart to
the right.
When a CDH occurs on the right it is termed a Morgagni hernia. The diaphragmatic defect of
a Morgagni hernia tends to be anterior, with the liver the most commonly herniated organ.
The two classic prenatal findings of CDH are a cystic intrathoracic mass representing the
stomach and/or bowel and nonvisualization of the stomach below the diaphragm.
Complications of CHD include pulmonary hypoplasia, bowel obstruction with resultant
polyhydramnios, and obstruction of venous return due to IVC compression, which may lead
to ascites.
Bronchopulmonary foregut malformation
gronchopulmonary foregut malformations are a spectrum of congenital abnormalities of the
fetal lungs and upper GI tract.
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) is a hamartomatous proliferation
of small airways which communicates with the bronchial tree. Blood supply is from
the pulmonary circulation. CPAM was previously called congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation (CCAM).
CPAM can be classified into three types based on the size of cysts (Type I- large cysts; Type II - small cysts;
Type III -1 tiny cysts too small to see on ultrasound). Today this classification is not used much anymore as
prognosis is dependent on size of the entire lesion rather than the size of the individual cysts.
CPAM is not associated with other anomalies (unlike CDH).
Many CPAM decrease in size and may disappear on ultrasound, but remain apparent on CT or MRI.
Transverse ultrasound through the fetal
thorax shows al large echogenic mass
(calipers) containing small cystic spaces in left
hemithorax, displacing the heart to the right.
This was found to be a CPAM following surgical
resection.
Sequestration is aberrant lung tissue with a systemic blood supply, usually from the aorta.
The most characteristic location of sequestration is the left lower lobe.
Classic ultrasound appearance of sequestration is an echogenic mass at the left lung base. The
sequestration may occasionally be subdiaphragmatic and simulate an adrenal mass.
Systemic blood supply should be confirmed with color Doppler. In the absence of the Doppler findings,
sequestration may be difficult to differentiate from CPAM. In contrast to the findings of CPAM, cysts are
less common, there is less mass effect, and location is almost always in the lower lobes.
Combination or hybrid CPAM/sequestration lesions are common at pathology.
Bronchogenic, gastrointestinal duplication, and neurenteric cysts almost always appear as
solitary, simple cysts in the thoracic cavity on ultrasound.
Obstetrics: 355