Atypical femoral fracture (continued)
Atypical femoral fractures are a form of insufficiency fracture that occur in the proximal
lateral femoral diaphyseal cortex, typically the subtrochanteric region (defined as extending
from the lesser trochanter to 5 cm distal).
Atypical fractures are caused by insufficient osteoclastic-induced remodeling, resulting in a
brittle bone more susceptible to fracture.
Atypical femoral fractures are most known to occur in patients taking Disphosphonates
(which inhibit osteoclasts), but can also occur in patients on denosumab (a monoclonal
antibody that inhibits osteoclast maturation) or in patients without these medications.
The American Society of Bone and Mineral Research defined 5 major features, of which 4 of
the 5 must be present to diagnose an atypical femoral fracture:
No more than minimal trauma.
Substantially transverse orientation.
Must involve lateral cortex if incomplete; if complete may demonstrate a "medial spike."
No more than minimally comminuted.
Endosteal or periosteal thickening laterally.
When an atypical femoral fracture is identified, radiographs of the contralateral femur
should be performed, as these fractures are bilateral in a substantial minority of patients.
Treatment could include cessation of the offending medication if appropriate, and
intramedullary nailing in some patients, especially if that patient has pain.
Avascular necrosis (AVN)
Frontal radiograph shows subtle patchy subchondral sclerosis of both femoral heads (yellow arrows), with
subtle irregularity of the subchondral bone plate (the "cortex" overlying the cartilage) on the left (red arrow).
Coronal T1-weighted MRI shows serpiginous regions of signal abnormality involving the subchondral bone of
both femoral heads (yellow arrows). There is irregularity and undulating contour of the subchondral bone plate
on the left (red arrow), and with extensive edema (low signal intensity on this T1-weighted MR) asymmetrically
involving the left (blue arrow).
MSK: 1040