NUCLEAR CARDIOLOGY
MYOCARDIAL PERFUSION AND VIABILITY IMAGING
Perfusion imaging overview
Radionuclide perfusion imaging evaluates the blood flow to the left ventricular myocardium.
Decreased regional myocardial perfusion can result from reduced blood flow due to
nemodynamicaly significant obstructive coronary artery disease (stress) or lack of viable
cells due to myocardial infarction (rest).
Each perfusion test has two components: An element of stress, and a method of imaging.
The stress component can be physical (treadmill), pharmacologic-vasodilatory
(dipyridamole, adenosine, or regadenoson) or nammacogcadrenerge (dobutamine).
Radionuclide perfusion imaging can be performed with SPECT (Tc-99m sestamibi, Tc-99m
tetrofosmin, thallium-201) or PET radiotracers rubidium-82, N-13 ammonia). ECG-gated
imaging is standard for cardiac SPECT (GSPECT) and PET.
Other types of stress tests performed by cardiologists (ECG stress tests and echocardiographic or MRI
stress tests) can be performed in lieu of radionuclide imaging. These non-imaging tests can detect other
signs of perfusion abnormalities, such as ischemic ECG changes or wall motion abnormalities.
Viability imaging overview
Prior to a revascularization procedure (e.g., coronary artery bypass surgery, CABG or
coronary angioplasty/stenting. it is important to know if the hypoperfused myocardium is
viable, as the revascularization of scar tissue would not provide a clinical benefit.
Viability imaging can be performed with rest-redistribution thallium-201 perfusion imaging
or F-18 FDG PET metabolic imaging. F-18 FDG PET evaluation of glucose metabolism is the
gold standard for evaluation of myocardial viability, although unlike thallium FDG-PET does
not evaluate perfusion.
Clinical applications of myocardial perfusion and viability imaging
Evaluation of acute chest pain. Myocardial perfusion imaging is often the gatekeeper to
further cardiac workup in patients where there is clinical ambiguity for cardiac ischemia
(e.g., chest pain with negative ECG and troponins). A negative myocardial perfusion exam
allows safe discharge.
A normal myocardial perfusion exam is associated with a 0.6% annual rate of a cardiac event, even among
patients with a high pre-test likelihood of coronary artery disease.
Evaluation of hemodynamic significance of coronary stenosis. Even with a coronary
artery stenosis seen on invasive or CT angiography, patients with a normal nuclear cardiac
perfusion exam have a relatively low risk for cardiac events.
Risk stratification after MI. Findings that would classify a patient as high risk include:
Large and severe perfusion defects.
Significant stress-induced or peri-infarct ischemia.
Defect in multiple vascular territories (suggesting multi-vessel disease). Significant lung uptake,
suggesting left ventricular dysfunction.
Left ventricular aneurysm.
Low ejection fraction (less than 40% seen) on gated imaging.
Ejection fraction (EF) is calculated as EF = (EDC - ESC)/(EDC)
EDC = end diastolic counts; ESC = end systolic counts
Cardiac: 487