SPLEEN
CONGENITAL SPLENIC VARIATIONS AND ANOMALIES
Splenule (accessory spleen)
Also called an accessory spleen, a splenule is a focus of normal splenic tissue separate from
the main body of the spleen due to embryologic failure of fusion of the splenic anlage. The
most common location is the splenic hilum.
Although usually an incidental finding, the presence of a splenule does have significance in
certain clinical settings. For instance, splenectomy for consumptive thrombocytopenia may
not be curative if there is sufficient unresected accessory splenic tissue present. A splenule
may be mistaken for a lymph node or mass when in an unusual location. As previously
discussed, an intrapancreatic splenule may be mistaken for a hypervascular pancreatic mass.
A: splenule should follow splenic tissue on all MRI sequences. If in doubt, a Tc-99m sulfur
colloid scan or a heat-damaged Tc-99m RBC scan can be confirmatory.
Polysplenia syndrome
Polysplenia syndrome is a spectrum of anatomic disorders characterized by some degree of
visceral heterotaxia in addition to multiple discrete foci of splenic tissue. Multiple spleens
may be located on the right or left but are always on the same side as the stomach.
Polysplenia is usually associated with severe congenital cardiac anomalies. Most patients die
in early childhood, but a few may have only minor cardiac defects and polysplenia may be
incidentally discovered in adulthood.
Polysplenia is associated with venous anomalies including interruption of the IVC with
azygos or hemiazygos continuation. A less common association is a preduodenal portal vein.
Wandering spleen
A wandering spleen is a normal spleen with abnormal laxity or absence of its fixed
ligamentous attachments.
Wandering spleen may present clinically as an abdominal mass or may cause acute
abdominal pain secondary to torsion.
Axial (left image) and coronal (right image) contrast-enhanced CT demonstrates a normal sized spleen (arrows)
in the left pelvis, consistent with wandering spleen. There are no findings to suggest torsion.
GI: 163