POSTERIOR FOSSA MALFORMATIONS
Chiari I malformation
Borderline tonsillar ectopia: Sagittal T1-weighted MRI Chiari lin a different patient: Sagittal T2-weighted
shows pointed cerebellar tonsils extending inferiorly MRI shows inferior extension of the cerebellar tonsils
below the foramen magnum (yellow arrow). There is (yellow arrow). The presence of syringomyelia (red
no hydrocephalus or cervical spine syringomyelia.
arrow) allows more confident diagnosis of Chiari I.
Chiari I is inferior displacement of the cerebellar tonsils beyond the foramen magnum.
The clinical manifestation of Chiari li is variable and ranges from occasional exertional
headaches in an otherwise normal individual to severe myelopathy and brainstem
compromise. In babies, Chiari I may be associated with sleep apnea and feeding problems.
The most common complications of Chiari I are cervical syringomyelia and less commonly
hydrocephalus.
Syringomyelia, also called syringohydromyelo or syrinx, is fluid within the spinal cord.
Syringomyelia most commonly represents dilation of the central canal of the spinal cord, which normally
extends from the obex of the fourth ventricle to the filum terminale.
The syringomyelia associated with Chiari I is fusiform dilation of the central canal that does not
typically communicate with the fourth ventricle. Other forms of syringomyelia (typically associated with
hydrocephalus) may communicate with the fourth ventricle via the central canal.
Syringomyelia is seen more commonly in Chiari I malformations with associated skull base anomalies.
Both clinical diagnosis and diagnostic imaging criteria for Chiari I are controversial. Inferior
protrusion of the cerebellar tonsils is a relatively common finding in asymptomatic
individuals. Additionally, the clinical symptoms of Chiari I are nonspecific and include
headache and malaise, which may not always be attributable to the inferior protrusion of
the tonsils.
The classic criteria for diagnosis is herniation of either cerebellar tonsil by 5 mm, or
herniation of both tonsils by 3 mm; however, associated findings allowing a more specific
diagnosis include pointed configuration of the cerebellar tonsils, crowding of the posterior
fossa, and an associated complication such as cervical spine syringomyelia or hydrocephalus.
If the only finding is isolated inferior displacement of the tonsils, the term "borderline
tonsillar ectopia" is generally preferred.
Peds: 1189