Gray matter heterotopia
Gray matter heterotopia is a range of
disorders characterized by clusters of normal
neurons in abnormal locations caused by
arrested radial migration of neurons.
Gray matter heterotopia may be a cause of
seizures.
Gray matter heterotopia may be isolated or
associated with other structural anomalies.
Three main subtypes include periventricular
subependymal) nodular heterotopia, focal
subcortical heterotopia, and leptomeningeal T2-weighted MRI shows extensive bilateral
heterotopia.
periventricular nodular heterotopia (arrows), most
prominent on the right.
Agenesis / hypogenesis of the corpus callosum
Agenesis of the corpus callosum is a relatively common congenital abnormality. The most
common clinical manifestations of agenesis of the corpus callosum are refractory seizures
and/or developmental delay.
Complete agenesis of the corpus callosum causes secondary abnormalities in ventricular
morphology:
Colpocephaly (dilation of the occipital horns of the lateral ventricles) may result from decreased white
matter volume posteriorly.
The lateral ventricles are often parallel in orientation and widely spaced.
Medial impressions on the lateral ventricles are caused by Probst bundles, which are axons that
would normally constitute the corpus callosum, but instead pursue an aberrant course parallel to the
interhemispheric fissure.
The third ventricle may be enlarged and high-riding.
The anterior corpus callosum develops first followed by the posterior portion. The anterior
and posterior callosum develop separately and eventually unite to form a single structure.
Various degrees of corpus callosal hypogenesis may occur, the most common being absence
of the splenium.
Congenital corpus callosal anomalies are often associated with other midline abnormalities
including a midline lipoma or internemispheric cyst.
Callosal hypoplasia and midline lipoma: Sagittal T1-weighted MRI (left image) shows hypoplasia of the corpus
callosum with a large midline lipoma (yellow arrow). Axial T2-weighted MRI (right image) shows the lipoma
(yellow arrow) and parallel orientation of the lateral ventricles (red arrows) due to the callosal hypoplasia.
Peds: 1186