The AO Spine system describes 4 different classifications depending on fracture location:
the upper cervical spine, subaxial cervical spine, thoracolumbar spine, and the sacral spine
(including coccyx).
Essentially, fracture morphology is categorized hierarchically with increasing severity and/or
instability based on radiologic appearance. While the detailed classifications are beyond the
scope of this text, some of the key morphological features in the cervical and thoracolumbar
spine are listed below.
Upper cervical spine injuries (occiput to C2-3 joint):
Type A: Bony injuries only (stable)
Type B: Tension band or ligamentous disruption +/- bony injuries (stable or unstable)
Type C: Translation injuries with displacement relative to adjacent vertebrae (unstable)
Anterior tension band includes the anterior longitudinal ligament.
Posterior tension band includes the posterior ligamentous complex.
Subaxial cervical spine injuries (C3-C7):
Type A: Compression fractures without ligamentous injury
Type B: Tension band disruption
Type C: Translation injuries
Type F: Facet joint injuries
Thoracolumbar spine injuries:
Type A: Compression fractures, including wedge compressions and burst fractures
Type B: Distraction injuries with tension band disruption, including Chance fractures and hyperextension
injuries
Type C: Translation injuries resulting in displacement and dislocation
POSTOPERATIVE SPINE IMAGING
Overview of postoperative spine imaging
Spine procedures can generally be thought of as falling into one of three categories:
stabilization and fusion (for trauma or scoliosis), decompression (typically caused by
discovertebral degeneration), and lesion excision. Some surgeries may span two or more of
these categories.
If instrumented fusion is performed, imaging is critical to determine if there is hardware
failure (hardware fracture), assess screw position, evaluate for lucency surrounding the
screws, and to assess healing of the fusion mass.
For decompressive surgeries, imaging should also assess if there is a cause for persistent or
new pain, such as recurrent disc herniation, scar formation, arachnoiditis, adjacent segment
degeneration, or infectious process.
For lesion excision procedures, signs of lesion recurrence should be carefully evaluated.
Patients with fusion are at increased risk for fracture due to altered biomechanics.
Spine: 905