POSTERIOR SKULL BASE
Anatomy of the posterior skull base
The posterior skull base is bounded by the posterior clivus anteriorly, the posterior aspect of
the petrous temporal bone and condylar part of the occipital bone laterally, and the mastoid
temporal bone and squamous occipital bone posteriorly.
The foramen magnum is formed within the occipital bone and transmits the medulla
oblongata, vertebral arteries, anterior/posterior spinal arteries, and spinal accessory nerve.
Important foramina within the posterior skull base include jugular foramen and the
hypoglossal canal, which are separated by the jugular tubercle.
A fibrous or bony septum divides the jugular foramen into anteromedial pars nervosa and
posterolateral pars vascularis.
Pars nervosa transmits cranial nerve IX glossopharyngeal nerve) with its tympanic branch, Jacobson
nerve, and the inferior petrosal sinus (mnemonic Nervosa Nine).
Pars vascularis is larger and transmits thei internal jugular vein, posterior meningeal artery, cranial nerves
X (vagus nerve) and XI (accessory nerve), and Arnold nerve (auricular branch of CN X).- The hypoglossal canal transmits the cranial nerve XII (hypoglossal nerve).
General approach to the posterior skull base
Al large subset of lesions within the posterior skull base are not specific to the posterior skull
base and can be seen elsewhere. These include:
Fibro-osseous lesions such as fibrous dysplasia, Paget's disease.
Cartilage/bone tumors such as chordomas, chondrosarcomas, osteosarcomas, plasmacytomas, multiple
myeloma, LCH.
Vascular malformations.
Metastases.
The most common lesions localized to the jugular foramen are, glomus jugulare tumors,
schwannomas, and meningiomas.
Glomus jugulare tumors make up 80% of primary neoplasms arising from the jugular foramen. The typical
patient is a woman in late middle age presenting with pulsatile tinnitus and conductive hearing loss.
Imaging findings are: similar to glomus tumors in other areas of the head and neck, as described previously.
Bony changes of the jugular bulb can be used to differentiate these lesions on CT. Classically, glomus
jugulare tumors cause permeative erosion, schwannomas cause smooth remodeling, meningiomas cause
hyperostosis.
Glomus, jugulare tumor: Axial CT through the mastoid air cells shows permeative, moth-eaten bony
destruction centered on the right jugular foramen (arrows).
Cerebellopontine angle tumors also localize to the posterior skull base and are discussed
earlier in the chapter.
Neuro Head & Neck: 833