ABNORMALITIES OF THE SECONDARY PULMONARY LOBULE
Consolidation and ground glass
Consolidation and ground glass opacification are two very commonly seen patterns of lung
disease caused by abnormal alveoli. The alveolar abnormality may represent either filling of
the alveoli with fluid or incomplete alveolar aeration.
Consolidation can be described on either a chest radiograph or CT, while ground glass is
generally reserved for CT.
Although consolidation often implies pneumonia, both consolidation and ground glass are
nonspecific findings with a broad differential depending on chronicity (acute versus chronic)
and distribution (focal versus patchy or diffuse).
Consolidation
Consolidation: Contrast-enhanced
CT shows bilateral consolidative
opacities, more densely
consolidated on the left. There
are bilateral air bronchograms.
Although these imaging findings
are nonspecific, this was a case
of multifocal consolidative
adenocarcinoma.
Consolidation is histologically due to complete filling of affected alveoli (commonly
remembered as blood, pus, water, or cells).
Pulmonary vessels are not visible through the consolidation on an unenhanced CT.
Air bronchograms are often present if the airway is patent. An air bronchogram represents a
lucent air-filled bronchus (or bronchiole) seen within a consolidation.
Consolidation causes silhouetting of adjacent structures on conventional radiography.
Acute consolidation is most commonly due to pneumonia, but the differential includes:
Pneumonia (by far the most common cause of acute consolidation).
Aspiration, consolidation may appear heterogeneous from mucus plugging.
Pulmonary hemorrhage (primary pulmonary hemorrhage or aspiration of hemorrhage).
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is noncardiogenic pulmonary edema seen in critically
ill patients and thought to be due to increased capillary permeability.
Pulmonary edema may cause consolidation if severe.
The differential diagnosis of chronic consolidation includes:
Adenocarcinoma, previously bronchioloalveolar carcinoma
Lymphoma.
Organizing pneumonia, which is a nonspecific response to injury characterized by granulation polyps
which fill the distal airways, producing peripheral rounded and nodular consolidation.
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, an inflammatory process characterized by eosinophils causing alveolar
filling in an upper-lobe distribution.
Chest: 9