Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) placement
basilic vein
cephalic vein -
median nerve
brachial artery
brachial
veins
humerus -
radial nerve -
The basilic vein, located medial and superficial to the brachial veins, is the first choice for
peripherally inserted catheter (PICC) placement. The cephalic vein adds an extra curve as
it joins the axllary/subclavian vein, but is generally the second choice if the basilic is not
available. There is risk of damaging the median nerve with placement in a brachial vein as
the median nerve lies superficial to the brachial veins.
A PICC should not be placed in a patient with chronic renal failure who may need a fistula in
the future. Central access using the neck veins should be used instead.
FLUID DRAINAGE AND ASPIRATION
Fluid collections in the body include sterile serous collections or abscesses. Conventional
wisdom states that hematomas should not be drained; however, there is evidence that
hematoma aspiration may lead to more rapid symptom relief.
The Seldinger technique is a common method by which a catheter is inserted over a
guidewire.
The direct trocar technique can be performed safely with large superficial collections.
The catheter is directly inserted into the collection with the inner stylet. The stylet is then
removed and the catheter is aspirated to ensure placement in the fluid collection and to
obtain the initial sample. The catheter is then coiled and locked.
latrogenic seeding of infection can be minimized with sterile technique. A fresh sterile
preparation is needed for each separate fluid collection to avoid cross contamination. Sepsis
should be anticipated prior to a drainage procedure and supportive care started promptly.
Creation of persistent fistulous connection may occur with indwelling catheters, and is a
complication that should be considered during procedural planning.
When attempting to drain an acute collection that has not yet been walled off with
inflammatory granulation tissue, the guidewire or catheter may advance beyond the
collection and perforate adjacent structures, not meeting adequate resistance at the far end
of the collection.
Post-procedure, drainage catheters require daily maintenance to ensure proper function
and resolution of the collection. The catheter, connections, and fixation devices should be
checked daily and flushed up to three times a day with saline depending on the collection.
The drain site should be kept clean and dry.
IR: 648