Truncus arteriosus
In truncus arteriosus, a single great artery
arises from the base of the heart to supply the
systemic, pulmonary, and coronary circulations.
The single great artery usually overrides a VSD.
Truncus arteriosus is the most common type of
single great artery
congenital heart disease to have a right aortic
arch (21-36% of cases). It is also associated
VSD
with DiGeorge syndrome (30-35% of cases).
The classic radiograph appearance is
cardiomegaly, narrow mediastinum, and
pulmonary edema.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR)
In total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), all pulmonary veins connect
anomalously to the systemic venous circulation instead of draining into the left atrium.
There is an obligate interatrial right-to-left communication enabling blood to reach the left
heart, such as a large PFO or an ASD.
Classification of TAPVR is based on the position of the venous drainage relative to the heart:
Supracardiac (40%): Anomalous venous return is at or above the level of the SVC. The common
confluence of the pulmonary veins drains into the left inominate vein via a vertical vein. Chest radiograph
chows the characteristic snowman sign, with the dilated vertical vein making up the left border of the
snowman. The snowman sign is seen in older patients without pulmonary venous obstruction.
Cardiac (20%): Anomalous drainage is intoi the coronary sinus or right atrium.
Infracardiac (35%): The anomalous drainage passes through the diaphragm via the esophageal hiatus
and then drains into the hepatic IVC, hepatic vein, or portal vein. Pulmonary edema can result due to
obstruction at the level of the diaphragm.
Mixed (<5%): Anomalous venous drainage is a combination of the above types.
Clinical and radiographic findings depend on the degree of pulmonary venous obstruction
and admixture. A typical radiographic appearance of obstructed TAPVR appearance is a
normal-sized heart and pulmonary edema in an infant.
Single ("tingle") ventricle
There are multiple variations of the single ventricle anomaly, which are all characterized by
arterio-venous admixture at the level of a shared monoventricle.
Double outlet right ventricle (DORV) can be considered a form of single ventricle.
Peds: 1116