Nodular subcortical enhancement (intra-axial; continued)
Edema is almost always present with metastatic disease of the gray-white junction, although
slightly more distal cortical metastases may not show any edema and may be detectable
only on the post-contrast images.
In contrast to the subcortical pattern seen with arterial metastases, venous dissemination of
metastasis (e.g., pelvic malignancy spread via the Batson prevertebral venous plexus) leads
to posterior fossa disease by transit through the retroclival venous plexus.
Gyriform enhancement (intra-axial)
Axial T1-weighted post-contrast MRI (left image) shows a focus of enhancement along the gyral surface of the
left frontal lobe (arrow) in a pattern typical of gyriform enhancement. This region is hyperintense on the ADC
map (arrow on right image), consistent with increased diffusivity. There is no significant mass effect. This was a
late subacute infarct.
Superficial enhancement of the cortical (gyral) surface of the brain can be due to either
cerebral infection, inflammation, or ischemia.
Herpes encephalitis is a serious necrotizing infection of the brain parenchyma due to
reactivation of latent HSV-1 infection within the trigeminal ganglion. The medial temporal
lobes and cingulate gyrus are usually affected first and demonstrate gyral enhancement
due to inflammation, petechial hemorrhage, and resultant BBB breakdown. The involved
areas typically also demonstrate reduced diffusivity.
Meningitis may cause gyral enhancement in addition to the leptomeningeal enhancement
previously discussed.
Subacute infarct can demonstrate gyriform enhancement lasting approximately 6 days to 6
weeks after the initial ischemic event.
In contrast to the gyriform enhancement of subacute infarct, an acute infarct may demonstrate vascular
enhancement due to reactive collateral vasodilation and resultant hyperemia.
Enhancement related to subacute infarct is often associated with varying degree of T1 shortening
hyperintensity) and this can be an important distinguishing feature in addition to volume loss that will
take longer time to manifest.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is a syndrome of vasogenic
white matter edema triggered by altered autoregulation that may demonstrate gyral
enhancement. PRES may rarely exhibit restricted diffusion.
SMART syndrome (stroke-like migraine attacks after radiation therapy) is a delayed
complication of radiotherapy, usually occurring years or decades after treatment. It is
characterized by contiguous cortical thickening, edema, gyriform DWI abnormality, and
enhancement. It can progressively worsen over months, but eventually stabilizes.
Neuro Brain: 662