FIRST TRIMESTER PREGNANCY
IMAGING OF THE EARLY PREGNANCY
Gestational sac
The gestational sac is first seen at 5 weeks of gestational age by transvaginal ultrasound
(TVUS). A gestational sac is usually seen transvaginally if the B-hCG is greater than 2000
mIU/mL. However, use caution when using this discriminatory, value as there are exceptions
such as in multiple gestations.
With a positive pregnancy test and normal adnexae, any round or oval fluid collection in
the uterus is overwhelmingly likely to represent a very early intrauterine pregnancy (IUP).
The mean sac diameter (MSD) is the average diameter of the gestational sac measured
in three orthogonal planes (L X W X H)/3). The MSD is not routinely measured but may be
helpful in assessing viability.
Ifthe MSD measures 8 mm by TVUS, a yolk sac should be visible. Ifa yolk sac is not present, the pregnancy
is unlikely to be successful.
Ift the MSD measures 16 mm, a live embryo should be visible. If an embryo is not seen when the MSD is
16-24 mm, the pregnancy is suspicious for but not diagnostic of failed pregnancy.
Ifthe MSD measures: 25 mm or greater and no embryo is seen, it is diagnostic of failed pregnancy.
A: subchorionic hematoma is a complication of early pregnancy caused by bleeding of the
chorionic attachment.
A: small subchorionic hematoma adjacent to the gestational sac is of no clinical significance.
In general, as size of the subchorionic hematoma increases, the risk of pregnancy loss increases. However,
the extent of the gestational sac surrounded by hematoma is more predictive of pregnancy loss than
volume of the hematoma.
Yolk sac
The yolk sac is normally seen by 5.5 weeks.
An abnormally large (>5 mm) yolk sac increases the risk of failed pregnancy.
Embryo and heartbeat
The embryo is first visualized adjacent to the
yolk sac by about 6 weeks, at which time the
heartbeat is present as a flickering motion.
It is unusual to see an embryo with a
measurable crown-rump length (CRL) but
without a heartbeat. No heartbeat with a CRL
<7 mm is suspicious for, though not diagnostic
of, failed pregnancy.
Dist = 0.374cm
No heartbeat with a CRL 27 mm is diagnostic of Normal embryo (measuring 3.7 mm) and yolk sac.
failed pregnancy.
This embryo had normal heart rate of 112 bpm.
If the early heart rate is less than 90 bpm, there is very little chance that the pregnancy will
be successful. There is no such thing as a "too fast" heart rate. In fact, embryos with a faster
heart rate have the highest chance of normal outcome.
If the CRL is <4 mm, <90 bpm is considered slow and 2100 is normal.
Ifthe CRL is >5 mm, <110 bpm is considered slow and 2120 is normal.
Obstetrics: 325