Radiofrequency ablation (RFA)
B
Radiofrequency ablation in a 51-year-old male with renal cell carcinoma. A) Axial noncontrast CT preliminary
images show a hyperdense lesion in the right kidney (arrow). B) Intraprocedure axial CT shows three ablation
probes in place. The ablation zone is not well seen during the procedure. C) Follow-up post-contrast axial CT at
three years shows expected appearance of the ablation zone (arrow) with peripheral calcification.
Mechanism: The RF electrode generates a simple electrical circuit through the body with
alternating electromagnetic fields that agitate adjacent molecules, resulting in frictional
heating of tissue around the probe, and ultimately results in coagulation necrosis and cell
death at temperatures greater than 55°C. There is an exponential drop in temperature as
you get further from the probe. Grounding pads are used to serve as a dispersive electrode.
Technique: A single heating cycle slowly heats the tissue to 50-100°C for 6-15 minutes. Care
must be taken to not increase the temperature too quickly, which can char the soft tissues
and cause evaporation with formation of microbubbles, both of which increase the electrical
impedance and limit flow of current, reducing the effectiveness of the probe.
Advantages: RFA is the most established and widely available option. The total procedure
time is shorter when compared to cryoablation. RFA cauterizes small vessels and decreases
bleeding risk. RFA is the most cost-effective option compared to other ablation techniques.
Disadvantages: RFA is heavily dependent on good electrical and thermal tissue conductivity.
The ablation zone is not well monitored in real time. RFA is most susceptible to the heat sink
effect, which can result in residual unablated tissue and an unpredictable ablation zone.
Microwave ablation (MWA)
Mechanism: An electromagnetic field is used to force polar molecules (mostly H20) to
continuously realign with an oscillating electric field, which increases the kinetic energy
of the molecules and results in heating. The microwave energy is transmitted through the
antenna and directly into the volume of tissue around the antenna. Rapid cell death occurs
at temperatures greater than 55°C, and surrounding tissue can reach over 100°C. The
antennas are then cooled with water or gas.
Technique: One MWA probe is placed with imaging guidance and the ablation is typically
completed with one heating cycle. The power and duration of the heat is dependent on
tumor size, but usually varies between 45W and 80W for 5-10 minutes.
Advantages: MWA can generate very high temperatures, ablate through charred or necrotic
tissue, and rapidly heats a large volume of tissue. It is less susceptible to heat sink effects
from adjacent vessels and can cauterize blood vessels, decreasing bleeding risk. MWA has
potential for simultaneous use of multiple antennas and does not require grounding pads,
unlike RFA.
IR: 637