PENILE ABNORMALITIES
Normal anatomy
*frequent plaquel locations
DORSAL
(in Peyronie disease)
*superficial dorsal vein
*dorsal nerve
*dorsal artery
skin
0 / 000
*deep cavernous artery
superficial fascia
corpus cavernosum
areolar tissue
corpus spongiosum
deep (Buck's) fascia
urethra
*tunica albuginea
"bulbo-cavernous: artery,
anterior branch
*septum pectiniforme
VENTRAL
Peyronie disease
Peyronie disease is an acquired condition associated with penile deformity and shortening
of the penis that can lead to sexual dysfunction. A dorsal curvature is common, usually at
the distal 1/3. It is caused by (palpable) plaque formation in the tunica albuginea and corpus
cavernosum. The etiology is unclear but possibly associated with abnormal response to
repetitive microtrauma, collagen vascular disease, or advancing age.
Peyronie disease has an acute phase that can last for 12-18 months, associated with pain
and sometimes flaccidity during intercourse. In the chronic phase, penile deformity is
most commonly dorsal curvature (77%) or lateral curvature (20%). Surgical intervention is
indicated in cases of severe bending or shortening of the penis, and typically deferred until
the chronic phase, to minimize theoretical recurrence of fibrosis.
Ultrasound is highly sensitive for penile plaques (which appear as localized echogenic
thickening of the tunica albuginea) and calcifications. Plaques are most often seen on the
dorsal surface (70%) or midshaft (42%).
MRI can be used in more complex cases for surgical planning, and better characterizes
abnormal penile curvature. Plaques can be seen as focal areas of T1 and T2 hypointense
thickening, but calcifications are difficult to see on MRI. CT has limited role in evaluation.
Penile carcinoma
Penile cancer is relatively rare; squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) accounts for >95% of primary
penile neoplasms and typically occurs in the glans penis.
Spread of penile cancer typically occurs via lymphatics and varies depending on the location
of the primary lesion: skin of penis and prepuce to superficial inguinal nodes; glans penis to
deep inguinal and external iliac nodes. The Buck fascia acts as a barrier for corporal invasion
and hematogenous spread.
Two staging systems are used: TNM (most commonly) or Jackson classification.
Important components of staging include invasion into the shaft/corpora and metastatic
ymphadenopathy.
Lower stage (I/II disease) is usually curable with local resection with or without partial
penectomy. High stage disease often requires palliative treatment.
GU: 278