ONCOLOGIC INDICATIONS OF F-18 FDG PET/CT
Lung cancer
Lung cancer initial staging: Fused axial PET/CT (left image) and coronal PET MIP (right image) show an intensely
FDG-avid right upper lobe mass (blue arrow) representing the patient's primary bronchogenic carcinoma.
There were no enlarged or FDG-avid hilar or mediastinal lymph nodes, and no FDG-avid distant metastases.
Also note normal biodistribution of FDG in the other organs.
PET/CT plays a role both in the initial staging of patients with lung cancer, and in evaluating
response to treatment.
For initial staging, PET/CT is most useful in evaluating local tumor extension and searching
for distant metastases. Approximately 10% of patients with a negative metastatic workup by
CT will have PET evidence of metastasis.
PET/CT also plays a role in the initial detection of mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes.
Although PET is very sensitive for detecting malignant lymph nodes, it is not specific.
Mediastinoscopy is the gold standard for lymph node staging. Given the lack of PET
specificity, PET-positive mediastinal nodes must be followed by mediastinoscopy before
potentially curative surgery is denied based solely on the PET.
Solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN)
Evaluation of a suspicious solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) is an indication for PET/CT.
Depending on the equipment used, 5-8 mm is typically the smallest size for a nodule that
can be reliably evaluated by PET.
The majority of malignant SPNS are FDG-avid. However, low-grade tumors such as lung
adenocarcinoma or carcinoid may not be metabolically active and may be falsely negative
on PET.
Conversely, the majority of benign SPNS are not FDG-avid. Active granulomatous disease
(including tuberculosis) may take up FDG, thus falsely positive on PET.
Iti is never possible to definitively diagnose a nodule as benign or malignant based on SUV
value alone.
In general, if a nodule is not FDG-avid, short-term follow-up is reasonable. If the nodule is
FDG-avid then biopsy or resection is preferred.
Nucs: 447