SYNDROMES WITH RENAL MASSES (ALL HAVE INCREASED RISK OF RCC)
von Hippel-Lindau (VHI)
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is an autosomal dominant multi-organ syndrome caused by a
mutation in the VHL tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 3, which leads to cysts and
neoplasms in multiple organs.
The primary manifestation of VHL in the genitourinary system is multiple bilateral renal cell
carcinomas, most commonly the clear cell subtype.
Other genitourinary manifestations of VHL include multifocal pheochromocytoma and renal
cysts.
Central nervous system manifestations of VHL include nemangioDastoma of the brainstem,
cerebellum, or spinal cord.
Pancreatic and hepatic manifestations include malignant neuroendocrine pancreatic tumor,
pancreatic serous cystadenoma (a benign neoplasm), and pancreati/hepatic cysts.
Birt-Hogg-Dubé
Birt-Hogg-Dubé is an autosomal dominant syndrome (mutation of BHD gene on
chromosome 17p) of dermatologic lesions, cystic lung disease, and multiple renal
oncocytomas, renal cell carcinomas (Chromophobe subtype), and hybrid chromophobe RCC-
oncocytoma tumors.
Tuberous sclerosis (TS)
Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows
multiple bilateral fat-containing renal
masses, compatible with AMLS in
this patient with known tuberous
sclerosis.
Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disease caused by a
tumor suppressor gene mutation. It manifests clinically with seizures, developmental delay,
and (mostly) benign tumors in multiple organ systems.
The most common renal manifestation of TS is multiple bilateral renal angiomyolipomas
(AMLS). Approximately 50% of patients with TS will have at least one AML.
Renal cysts can be seen in "25%.
The relative risk of renal cell carcinoma is increased in patients with TS, which occurs in
approximately 2-3% of patients. Diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma is complicated by the
abnormal kidneys that may have multiple cysts and/or AMLS.
In the heart, the most common neoplasm is a rnabdomyoma. A cardiac rhabdomyoma may
be present during fetal life and can be detected by fetal ultrasound.
In the lung, a process of smooth muscle proliferation identical to ymphangoleomyomatosis
can occur, causing cystic replacement of lung parenchyma. It has been suggested that the
abnormal smooth muscle in the lung in patients with TS represents genetically identical
metastatic smooth muscle from a renal angiomyolipoma.
GU: 266