Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a demyelinating disease caused by reactivation
of measles virus, usually after a long latent period.
Imaging shows periventricular white matter lesions, but in distinction to the other white
matter entities, SSPE lesions tend to have surrounding edema and mass effect.
IATROGENIC WHITE MATTER DISEASE
Radiation injury
Whole brain radiation injury
White matter radiation injury: Axial FLAIR image
shows extensive confluent T2 prolongation within
most of the visualized white matter. The patient had
a remote history of whole brain radiation therapy
for a high-grade glioma.
Radiation injury related to whole brain radiation therapy has three distinct patterns,
characterized by the timing of presentation and timing of radiation.
The acute phase occurs during or immediately after radiation therapy, thought to reflect
edema due to endothelial injury. It may present as diffuse T2 prolongation in the white
matter. Clinically patients can present with acute encephalopathy with signs of increased
intracranial pressure. This is usually self-limited or improved with dexamethasone.
The early delayed phase occurs between several weeks and up to 6 months after treatment,
and is thought to be due to demyelination. MRI findings can vary from white matter T2
prolongation in the field of radiation to increase in size of contrast-ennancing lesions within
the radiation field. In whole brain radiation, the changes are most pronounced in the
periventricular regions.
The late delayed phase is most commonly seen with SRS. It can start as early as 6 months,
most commonly between 9 to 15 months, and sometimes years after radiation. Late effects
are typically irreversible and histologically are due to vascular changes including coagulative
necrosis and include white matter changes, radionecrosis, and vascular lesions.
Radiation necrosis typically occurs weeks to months after radiation, with 80% of cases occurring within
three years of completion of radiotherapy. Imaging demonstrates a peripherally enhancing, centrally
necrotic lesion. Treatment is usually corticosteroids.
Other effects include mineralizing microangiopathy which occurs more than 6 months after radiation and
presents as calcification in the basal ganglia or dentate nuclei. It is more common in children than adults.
Radiation vasculitis can occur in large vessels, and can present as focal narrowed segments on angiogram.
Involvement of distal internal carotid arteries can result in a moyamoya phenomenon.
Other vascular lesions such as capillary telangiectasis or cavernous malformations can be seen.
Neuro Brain: 736