Xanthogrenulomatous pyelonephritis
adenopathy
Gerota's fascia
small bowe!
ileus
Zuckerkand!s fascia
staghorn.calcul
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis: Contrast-enhanced CT: shows a massively enlarged, poorly enhancing
right kidney with dilated and distorted calyces. Several staghorn calculi are present. There is thickening
of Zuckerkand's and Gerota's fascia, perinephric stranding, and retroperitoneal adenopathy. The partially
visualized small bowel in the left hemiabdomen is dilated secondary to ileus from perirenal inflammation.
Case courtesy Shreya Sood, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis (XGP) is a chronic renal infection due to obstructing
staghorn calculi, leading to replacement of renal parenchyma with fibrofatty inflammatory
tissue.
Proteus mirabilis and Escherichia coli are the two most common organisms.
The clinical presentation of XGP includes flank pain and nonspecific constitutional
symptoms, such as fever and weight loss. Anemia and hematuria are also common.
XGP can be diffuse (85%) or localized. The localized form, also known as tumefactive XGP,"
may mimic a renal mass.
CTi is the primary modality for imaging, which demonstrates fatty replacement of the renal
parenchyma, marked perinephric inflammatory stranding, and straghorn calculi. The bear paw
sign represents the configuration oft the hypoattenuating fibrofatty masses arranged in a radial
pattern, reminiscent of a bear's paw.
Complications include perinephric abscess and fistula formation. Treatment is nephrectomy.
Primary differential considerations include acute obstructing calculus with pyonephrosis or
renal/transitional neoplasm with calcification.
HIV-associated nephropathy
HIV virus may directly infect the kidney to produce HIV nephropathy, most commonly
resulting in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). HIV nephropathy clinically presents
with nephritic renal failure.
The kidneys are characteristically echogenic. Enlarged echogenic kidneys are specific for HIV
nephropathy, although the kidneys are enlarged only about 20% of the time.
GU: 255