INFECTION AND INFLAMMATION
Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis: Frontal and lateral radiographs of
the knee (top left panel) show an irregular lucency
(arrows) of the medial proximal tibial metaphysis.
Coronal fluid-sensitive T2-weighted MRI of both knees
shows extensive marrow edema of the proximal left
tibial metaphysis extending across the physis into the
epiphysis (arrow) and into the soft tissues. The right
knee appears normal.
Anterior and posterior Tc-99m MDP bone scan (bottom
left panel) shows increased proximal left tibial uptake
(arrow). The bone scan was positive on all three phases
(angiographic and blood pool phases not shown).
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of
Virginia Health System.
The initial findings of osteomyelitis are often subtle on radiography and may require a
combination of plain radiographs, MRI, and scintigraphy for accurate early diagnosis.
Osteomyelitis in children is most commonly hematogenous, with the metaphyseal marrow
being the most common site of initial seeding where there is abundant blood supply.
In infants, the epiphysis receives blood supply from transphyseal vessels arising from metaphysis, SO
infection can cross the physis, resulting in epiphysitis and septic arthritis.
In older children, capillaries do not cross physis, sO transphyseal extension of a metaphyseal infection is
uncommon. In adults, as growth plates fuse, infection can again extend into the epiphysis.
The most common organism implicated in hematogenous osteomyelitis is S. aureus, with
Salmonella seen in sickle cell patients.
The imaging findings on radiography, MRI, and scintigraphy (three-phase bone scan) follow
the anatomic progression of infection. The initial hematogenous infection is intramedullary
and then subsequently spreads through the cortex and uplifts the periosteum. The
pediatric periosteum is only loosely adherent to bone, and the purulent infection is able to
dramatically uplift the periosteum, causing a prominent periosteal reaction.
It usually takes 10-14 days for findings to become evident on radiography. The initial finding
may be focal osteopenia due to hyperemia. Subsequently, a lucent, often aggressive-
appearing medullary lesion can erode through the cortex and cause periosteal reaction.
MRI and scintigraphy are much more sensitive for the detection of early osteomyelitis, with
findings seen on bone scan within 24-72 hours of symptom onset. Osteomyelitis is further
discussed in the musculoskeletal imaging section.
Peds: 1170