Arteriovenous malformation (continued)
On imaging, AVM is characterized by a vascular nidus ("nest") containing numerous
serpentine vessels that appear as black flow-voids on MRI. There are usually adjacent
changes to the adjacent brain including gliosis (T2 prolongation), dystrophic calcification,
and blood products (blooming on T2* gradient imaging). The losis/encepnalomalaca or
mineralization seen in the adjacent brain is due to alteration in vascular flow from the AVM.
AVM replaces rather than displaces brain. It causes minimal mass effect.
Uncommonly, a bleeding AVM may be angiographically occult if the malformed vessels are
compressed by the acute hematoma.
Factors that increase bleeding risk that are detectable by imaging include intra-nidal
aneurysm, venous ectasia, venous stenosis, deep venous drainage, and posterior fossa
location.
Treatment can be with embolization, stereotactic radiation, or surgical resection.
Dural arteriovenous fistula (dAVF)
Dural arteriovenous fistulas are a complex group of high-flow lesions characterized by
arteriovenous shunts between the meningeal arterioles and dural venules.
The primary prognostic feature is the presence and degree of cortical venous drainage. The
Cognard classification I through IV describes lesions with progressively increased risk of
bleeding.
Type :: No cortical venous drainage. Lowest
Type II: Direct cortical venous drainage:
risk of bleeding.
40% hemorrhage rate.
Type IIA: Reflux into dural sinus but not
Type IV: Direct cortical venous drainage with venous
cortical veins.
ectasia: 66% hemorrhage rate.
Type IIB: Reflux into cortical veins:
Type V: Spinal venous drainage. May cause
10-20% hemorrhage rate.
myelopathy.
Carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF) is a subtype of dAVF that is often caused by trauma with
resultant fistula between the cavernous carotid artery and the cavernous sinus. Enlargement
of the superior orbital vein and shunting within the cavernous sinus can lead to eye
symptoms, such as proptosis and cranial nerve palsy.
Vein of Galen malformation is a type of vascular malformation characterized by
arteriovenous fistulae from thalamoperforator branches into the deep venous system. The
enlarged vein is actually an enlarged median prosencephalic vein.
In childhood, a vein of Galen malformation is the most common extracardiac cause of high output
cardiac failure. Vein of Galen malformation may also be seen in adults, but clinically would be either
asymptomatic or may be the cause of Parinaud syndrome due to mass effect in the pineal region.
Neuro Brain: 687