Malignant germ cell tumor (GCT): Seminoma
Seminoma is the most common testicular malignancy. It has a favorable prognosis.
Seminoma typically occurs in middle-aged men and it accounts for about half of all GCTS. It
is usually more homogeneous than nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT). It tends to
be uniformly hypoechoic on ultrasound. Uncommonly, hCG may be elevated.
The spermatocytic subtype of seminoma occurs in slightly older men (mid-fifties) and has excellent
prognosis with orchiectomy only. Tumor markers are not elevated.
Seminoma: Grayscale (left image) and color Doppler show a heterogeneous hypoechoic vascular mass (yellow
arrows) in the left testis. Note the presence of numerous tiny echogenic foci (red arrows) representing
microlithiasis.
Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Malignant germ cell tumors: Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT)
Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT) include embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, yolk
sac tumor, choriocarcinoma, and mixed subtypes.
Mixed germ cell tumori is the most common NSGCT, and is the second most common primary testicular
malignancy after seminoma (about 1/3). The most common components of mixed NSGCT are embryonal
carcinoma and teratoma. It may contain elements of seminoma
Embryonal cell carcinoma in its pure form is rare and in adults is typically seen as a component of mixed
germ cell tumors. Thei infantile form, called endodermal sinus tumor or yolk sac tumor, is the most
common testicular tumor of infancy. AFP is elevated.
Teratoma is rare in its pure form in adults, but is seen in 50% of mixed NSGCT. Teratoma is classified as
mature, immature, and malignant. In adults, teratomas are usually malignant. In children, teratomas are
usually benign, with the mature subtype most commonly seen.
Choriocarcinoma is the most aggressive and rare NSGCT. Choriocarcinoma metastasizes early, especially to
brain and lung. Metastases tend to be hemorrhagic. hCG is always elevated and gynecomastia may result
from elevated chorionic gonadotropins.
NSGCT generally occur in younger patients compared to seminomas, typically in young men
in their twenties and thirties. NSGCT tend to be more aggressive than seminomas. Local
invasion into the tunica albuginea and visceral metastases are common.
Al heterogeneous testicular mass which contains solid and cystic components and coarse
calcification is a typical appearance for a NSGCT. It is not possible to distinguish the various
subtypes of NSGCT on ultrasound.
Burnt-out germ cell tumor
Burnt-out germ cell tumor is a primary testicular neoplasm that is no longer viable in the
testicle even though there is often viable metastatic disease, especially retroperitoneal.
In the testicle, focal calcification with posterior shadowing is characteristic. A mass may or
may not be present.
Treatment is orchiectomy in addition to systemic chemotherapy.
GU: 289