RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS (RA)
Overview of rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disorder where the synovium is the target of a
waxing and waning immune response. Rheumatoid factor (RF) is typically positive, although
it is not specific. RF is an antibody directed against IgG, which activates the complement
cascade. RA clinically presents with symmetrical joint pain, swelling, and morning stiffness.
RA first affects the small joints in the hands and wrists. Foot involvement may occur early, SO
foot radiographs are routinely obtained in suspected cases of RA. In more advanced cases,
RA affects the cervical spine, knees, shoulders, and hips.
Erosions are the imaging and pathologic hallmarks of RA, representing focal destruction
of bone due to cumulative inflammatory damage. Erosions have been postulated to occur
both due to the osteolytic interaction of synovial inflammation with articular cartilage (the
"outside-in" theory) and destructive effect of inflammation within the bone (the "inside-
out" theory). Half of RA patients develop erosions after one year of symptoms, and the
development of erosions is associated with increased disability and decreased quality of life.
The imaging findings of RA include:
Radiograph and CTj findings
MRIj findings
Marginal erosions, which first occur at the
Marginal erosions, which are fluid signal
intracapsular articular margins in the "bare area."
intensity and enhance.
The bare area is a region of exposed bone just
Synovitis, with thickened and early enhancing
within the joint capsule that is not covered by thick synovium.
cartilage.
Subchondral edema, due to inflammatory and
Soft-tissue swelling.
reactive changes.
Diffuse, symmetric joint space narrowing.
Joint subluxations.
Periarticular osteopenia.
Joint subluxations.
Rheumatoid arthritis in the hand and wrist
The hands are commonly affected in patients with RA.
Typical joints involved are the MCPs, PIPS, and the
carpal articulations. The DIPS are usually spared.
PIPS
The earliest radiographic changes of RA are soft-
tissue swelling and periarticular osteopenia, reflecting
synovitis and hyperemia.
Erosions occur early in disease, typically of the radial
aspects of the second and third metacarpal heads, the
radial and ulnar aspects of the bases of the proximal
phalanges, and the ulnar styloid.
MCPS
Joint subluxations are present in more advanced
disease, which typically are not reducible and lead to
several common deformities, including:
Carpals
Boutonnière deformity (PIP flexion and DIP hyperextension).
Swan neck deformity (PIP hyperextension and DIP flexion).
Ulnar subluxation of the fingers at the MCPs.
MSK: 914