PULMONARY INFECTION
CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION OF PNEUMONIA
Community-aequired pneumonia (CAP)
S. pneumoniae is the most common cause of communityacquired pneumonia (CAP).
Atypical pneumonia, including Mycoplasma, viral, and Chlamydia, typically infects young
and otherwise healthy patients.
Mycoplasma has a varied appearance and can produce consolidation, areas of ground glass attenuation,
centrilobular nodules, and tree-in-bud nodules.
Legionella most commonly occurs in elderly smokers. Infections tend to be severe.
Infection by Klebsiella and other gram-negatives occurs in alcoholics and aspirators.
Klebsiella classically leads to voluminous inflammatory exudates causing the bulging fissure. sign.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP)
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) occurs in hospitalized patients and is due to aspiration
of colonized secretions. HAP is caused by a wide variety of organisms, but the most
important pathogens include MRSA and resistant gram-negatives including Pseudomonas.
Healhcare-associated pneumonia (HCAP)
ealthcare-associated pneumonia is defined as pneumonia in a nursing home resident or in
a patient with a >2 day hospitalization over the past 90 days. Pathogens are similar to HAP.
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP)
Ventilator-assoclated pneumonia is caused by infectious agents not present at the time
mechanical ventilation was started. Most infections are polymicrobial and primarily involve
gram-negative rods such as Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter.
Pneumonia in the immunocompromised patient
Any of the above pathogens, plus opportunistic infections including Pneumocystis, fungi
such as Aspergillus, Nocardia, CMV, etc., can be seen in immunocompromised patients.
Different types of immunocompromise can lead to different infections. In particular,
neutropenia predisposes to fungal pneumonia.
RADIOGRAPHIC PATTERNS OF INFECTION
Lobar pneumonia
Lobar pneumonia is consolidation of a single lobe. It is usually bacterial in origin and is the
most common presentation of community-acquired pneumonia. The larger bronchi remain
patent, causing air bronchograms.
Bronchopneumonia
Bronchopneumonia is patchy peribronchial consolidation with air-space opacities, usually
involving several lobes, and may be caused by both bacterial and viral pneumonias as well as
aspiration.
Interstitial pneumonia
Interstitial pneumonia is a misnomer, a finding on CXR that usually corresponds to ground
glass on CT. Generally it can be caused by atypical (e.g., Mycoplasma, Chlamydia), viral, or
Pneumocystis pneumonia.
Round pneumonia
Round pneumonia is an infectious mass-like opacity seen in children, most commonly due to
S. pneumoniae. Infection remains confined due to incomplete formation of pores of Kohn.
Chest: 21