Dilated ardiomyopathy (DCM; continued)
Nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy: Delayed-enhancement short-axis cardiac MRI (left image) shows no
abnormal enhancement, but there is diffuse concentric dilation of the left ventricular and right ventricular
cavities, which is also appreciated on the axial image (right image). Bilateral small pleural effusions are present.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
An ischemic cause can be suggested by delayed enhancement in a vascular distribution on
MRI or coronary artery disease seen on CCTA.
Up to 41% of patients with idiopathic DCM demonstrate abnormal mesocardial LGE in a
nonischemic distribution in the mid-ventricular wall. The significance of this enhancement in
these patients is uncertain.
Catheter angiography is recommended to exclude coronary artery disease in a new
diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy.
VALVULAR DISEASE
Endocarditis
Endocarditis is infection of the cardiac valves. Risk factors for development of endocarditis
include intravenous drug abuse, poor dental hygiene, diabetes, and prosthetic valves.
Valvular vegetations are usually diagnosed by echocardiography, although CT angiography is
routinely able to depict vegetations >1 cm in diameter. CT can also evaluate for the presence
of a perivalvular abscess and assess for extracardiac complications of endocarditis, such as
septic pulmonary emboli.
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV)
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congential cardiovascular abnormality.
Acquired BAV occurs when fusion of two cusps of a trileaflet valve results in a functional
bicuspid valve, often due to leaflet calcification or rheumatic heart disease.
BAV is classified into three types depending on the number of raphes present. A raphe is
defined as the fusion point between two adjacent rudimentary coronary cusps.
Number of raphes: 0 (type 0), 1 (type 1), 2 (type 2)
Images of the BAV have a characteristic fishmouth appearance.
BAV predisposes to early onset degenerative aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, and
infective endocarditis.
Other abnormalities associated with BAV include aortic coarctation, supravalvular stenosis,
ascending aortic aneurysm, aortopathy leading to aortic dissection, patent ductus
arteriosus, Turner syndrome, and coronary artery anomalies.
Cardiac: 528