Biceps tendon dislocation
Biceps tendon dislocation:
Axial T1-weighted image with fat suppression from
an MR arthrogram shows medial dislocation of the
biceps tendon (yellow arrow) into the subscapularis.
An interstitial tear of the subscapularis tendon is
present (blue arrow).
Case courtesy Kirstin M. Small, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Biceps tendon dislocation is often seen in conjunction with injury of both the transverse
ligament and the biceps pulley.
Medial dislocation of the biceps tendon is associated with tear of the subscapularis tendon
(in contrast to biceps tears, which are more frequently associated with supraspinatus injury).
Axial MRI best demonstrates biceps tendon dislocation. The bicipital groove is empty and
the tendon can usually be seen medial to the bicipital groove.
INSTABILITY: OVERVIEW AND ANATOMY
Overview of instability
Shoulder instability is abnormal motion of the humeral head with respect to the glenoid
during movement, producing pain, clicking, or the feeling of an unstable joint.
Instability can manifest as dislocation, subluxation, or microinstability (repetitive motion).
The stability of the glenohumeral joint is mostly provided by dynamic and static soft-tissue
stabilizers, as there is minimal inherent osseous stability.
The dynamic stabilizers of the joint include the rotator cuff and biceps tendons.
The static stabilizer of the joint is the capsulo-labro-Iigamentous complex, which is
composed of the bony glenoid fossa, labrum, coracohumera. ligament, and superior, middle,
and inferior glenohumeral ligaments.
There are several labral, ligamentous, and osseous injuries associated with instability, but it
is unclear if the structural abnormalities are secondary to instability or a cause of it.
There are various classifications of instability incorporating clinical, etiological, and imaging
findings.
Instability can also be classified as traumatic or atraumatic.
Traumatic instability is usually secondary to trauma, causes instability in one direction only, is associated
with a Bankart lesion, and treated surgically. Traumatic instability is referred to as TUBS (traumatic,
unidirectional, Bankart, surgical).
Atraumatici instability can be divided into two types. The AIOS (acquired, instability, overstress, surgery)
pattern is usually seen in athletes with repetitive movements causing microinstability. AMBRI (atraumatic,
multidirectional, bilateral, rehabilitation, inferior capsule shift) lesions are due to congenital joint laxity.
Radiologists usually classify instability based on the direction of joint subluxation (anterior,
posterior, multidirectional, or superior). Similar to traumatic shoulder dislocations, anterior
instability accounts for the vast majority (95%) of cases.
MSK: 1054