Mesocardial delayed enhancement (continued)
Chagas disease is caused by the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi, and can lead to
cardiomyopathy. It is a rare diagnosis that is usually accompanied by travel history from
South America, specifically Brazil. On cardiac MRI, there is typically epicardial or mesocardial
LGE involving the apex, which can be seen even before the development of symptoms. An
apical predilection is a unique feature of Chagas myocarditis.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is described later in the chapter. Cardiac MRI shows
mesocardial LGE, particularly at the RV septal attachment sites and in regions of greatest
myocardial hypertrophy.
Subepicardial delayed enhancement
Myocarditis is inflammation of the myocardium, which may be secondary to multiple
causes. Viral infection is the most common cause of myocarditis, followed by autoimmune
disorders and drug toxicity. In addition to subepicardial LGE, cardiac MRI of myocarditis also
shows wall motion abnormalities in the affected regions.
Subepicardial delayed enhancement due to
myocarditis:
Delayed contrastenhanced short-axis cardiac
MRI shows subepicardial LGE (arrows) in the
inferior left ventricular wall. The LV is mildly
dilated.
Sarcoidosis may cause either mesocardial or subepicardial LGE in a nodular or patchy
pattern.
Delayed enhancement due to sarcoidosis:
PSIR cardiac MRI image shows multifocal LGE
(arrows) with all patterns due to sarcoidosis.
Chagas disease may cause epicardial or mesocardial LGE.
Circumferential subendocardial delayed enhancement
Amyloidosis is a systemic disorder of glycoprotein deposition throughout the extracellular
spaces. In the heart, amyloidosis causes biventricular myocardial thickening, which leads to
diffuse ventricular subendocardial LGE.
Cardiac transplant patients may demonstrate circumferential subendocardial LGE, thought
to correlate with the presence of myocardial fibrosis pathologically.
Hypereosinophilic syndrome is a systemic disorder characterized by eosinophilic infiltration
of multiple organs. Cardiac involvement (Loeffler's endocarditis) leads to endomyocardial
fibrosis and subendocardial LGE which can be circumferential. It predominantly affects the
cardiac apex and is associated with biventricular thrombi formation.
Cardiac: 519