Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is slightly less
common today than adenocarcinoma. Prior to
filtered cigarettes, SCC was more common.
SCC most commonly presents as a spiculated
nodule, just like adenocarcinoma. However, it can
also present as an endobronchial or hilar lesion.
The majority of SCC arise centrally from main,
lobar, or segmental bronchi, where the tumor
tends to cause symptoms early due to bronchial
obstruction.
Common radiographic findings are lobar
SCC: Axial CT shows a spiculated cavitary lesion
atelectasis, mucoid impaction, consolidation, and (arrow), shown at pathology to be squamous
bronchiectasis. SCC has a propensity to cavitate. cell carcinoma.
Small cell carcinoma
Small cell carcinoma is the third most common lung cancer cell type (after adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell). Neoplastic cells are of neuroendocrine origin and are associated with
various paraneoplastic syndromes. Small cell carcinoma is strongly associated with smoking.
Small cell usually presents as mediastinal or hilar ymphadenopathy, typically presenting as
a large hilar or parahilar mass. Involvement of the SVC may cause SVC syndrome. Small cell
rarely presents as a solitary pulmonary nodule.
The primary tumor is usually not identified.
For staging purposes, small cell is divided into limited-stage involving one hemithorax and
extensive-stage disease. The limited-stage is treated with chemoradiation whereas the
extensive-stage disease is treated with chemotherapy alone.
Radiograph
Coronal CT
Axial CT
Small cell carcinoma: Chest radiograph shows a right paratracheal opacity which corresponds to
mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy on CT. The lesion encases but does not significantly narrow the
involved bronchi and main pulmonary artery.
Large cell carcinoma
Large cell carcinoma often occurs in the lung periphery, where it presents as a large solid
mass with irregular margins. Focal necrosis can be present.
Histologically, large cell carcinoma is characterized by large nuclei and nucleoli with a
moderate amount of cytoplasm.
Large cell carcinoma can have rapid growth and early metastasis with overall poor prognosis.
Chest: 38