SUPRASELLAR / PARASELLAR MASS
Overview
The differential diagnosis for a parasellar/supraselar lesion is broad, but the imaging
findings together with the patient's age and clinical presentation can usually narrow the
differential diagnosis to a few entities.
The MOUSTACHE mnemonic may be helpful to remember the spectrum of parasellar/
suprasellar lesions, albeit not in order of prevalence:
Meningoma/Merasiass,
Optic pathway glioma.
Sellar lesion with supraselar/paraselar extension (e.g., macroadenoma).
Teratoma and other germ cell tumors (e.g., germinoma).
Aneurysm.
Craniopharyngioma.
Hypothalamic glioma or hamartoma.
Epidermoid/dermoid cyst.
In adults, the most common suprasellar neoplasm is pituitary macroadenoma that has
extended superiorly. The second most common suprasellar neoplasm and most common
paraselar/Cavernous sinus neoplasm is meningioma. The most common nonneoplastic
parasellar mass is an arterial aneurysm.
In children, the most common suprasellar neoplasms are craniopharyngioma, followed by
gliomas of the optic pathway or hypothalamus. A distinct subset of pediatric suprasellar
neoplasms are those arising from the infundibulum, of which the most common are germ
cell tumors and Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
Meningioma
Meningiomas can arise anywhere along the skull base meninges, including the planum
sphenoidale, anterior clinoid processes, tuberculum sellae, diaphragma sellae, dorsum
sellae, and cavernous sinus wall.
As with meningiomas elsewhere, these tumors show uniform, intense contrast
enhancement often with a dural tail. Meningiomas may cause adjacent hyperostosis due to
vasoactive factors.
An important imaging finding of a parasellar meningioma is possible encasement and
narrowing of the cavernous or supraclinoid internal carotid artery.
Aneurysm
The supraselar/paraselar region is the most common site of giant intracranial aneurysms.
These typically arise from the supraclinoid or cavernous internal carotid artery.
Aneurysms are an important entity to consider in the differential diagnosis of suprasellar/
parasellar tumors to avoid a catastrophic biopsy.
Pulsation artifact or a flow void may be present on conventional MRI sequences. CTA or
MRA would be diagnostic.
Metastases
Malignancies rarely metastasize to the pituitary gland and stalk.
Breast cancer is the most common primary tumor to metastasize to the suprasellar/
parasellar region. Other tumors include lung cancer, lymphoma, and prostate cancer.
Neuro Head & Neck: 800