MUSCULOSKELETAL INFECTION
SEPTIC ARTHRITIS
Overview of septic arthritis
Septic arthritis, which is bacterial infection of a joint, is a medical emergency. Rapid
diagnosis and treatment are essential to preserve the joint, as permanent cartilage damage
can occur within three days.
Septic arthritis is not typically an imaging diagnosis, and radiographs are commonly normal.
However, radiographs should be performed to evaluate for changes of advanced infection
(such as effusion, soft tissue swelling, or bony erosive changes) and also to exclude an
alternative explanation for the patient's pain (such as fracture, calcific tendinitis, severe
degenerative changes, etc.).
In a patient with an acute mono-articular (involving only one joint) arthritis, septic arthritis
should be a primary diagnostic consideration, even in the absence of fever or other systemic
signs of infection.
Diagnosis is confirmed with joint aspiration (arthrocentesis). Although it can take days for
complete microbiology results to become available, the aspirated fluid white blood cell
(WBC) count and percentage of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) can be used to
predict the probability of septic arthritis:
Parameter
Sensitivity
Specificity
WBC >100,000/ pL
29%
99%
WBC >50,000/ pL
62%
92%
WBC: >25,000/ pL
77%
73%
PMN 290%
73%
79%
Based on the table above, for instance, a fluid WBC count of >50,000 is 92% specific for septic arthritis;
however, this is only seen in 62% of cases of septic arthritis.
Empiric treatment for septic arthritis is reasonable for a WBC count of >50,000.
A common alternative etiology for elevated WBC count includes crystal arthropathy.
OSTEOMYELITIS
Overview of osteomyelitis
Literally meaning "inflammation (-itis) of the bone (osteo-) marrow (-myelo-),"
osteomyelitis is inflammation of the bone caused by an infectious organism. Osteomyelitis
has protean clinical and imaging manifestations, with an end pathway of chronic progressive
bony destruction if untreated.
Osteomyelitis can be classified by route of spread (hematogenous, contiguous spread, or
direct inoculation) or by chronicity (acute or chronic), although any route of spread can lead
to either acute or chronic disease.
The differentiation of acute, subacute, and chronic osteomyelitis is variably described in the literature.
In general, acute osteomyelitis is less than two weeks duration. Subacute osteomyelitis is the phase of
disease lasting less than three months but without acute symptoms.
The pathologic hallmark of chronic osteomyelitis is bone necrosis.
MSK: 973