POSTSURGICAL IMAGING
IMAGING IMPLANTS
Overview of implants
Implants can be used either for cosmetic reasons or for breast reconstruction after
mastectomy. The two types of implants in common use are filled with either silicone or
saline, although double lumen (inner silicone lumen and outer saline compartment) and
other varieties of implants exist.
Silicone implants are comprised of a silicone gel and come in pre-manufactured sizes. Saline
implants contain a valve that allows filling of the implant during surgery.
Regardless of the type of implant, a fibrous capsule is gradually formed as a reaction to
the foreign body. The capsule may become calcified. Over time, the implant may partially
herniate through the capsule without rupturing, causing a palpable contour deformity.
Implants can be placed either behind the pectoralis (retropectoral) or directly in front of the
pectoralis/Dehind the hbroglandular tissue prepectoral/retroglandular),
Mammographic imaging of implants
When implants are imaged with mammography, standard views are difficult to interpret
because the hign-attenuation implant can obscure breast tissue. mplant-displaced views
(also called Eklund views) displace the implant posteriorly and pull the native breast tissue
anteriorly to allow for improved compression and visualization of the breast tissue.
A saline implant can be identified on mammography due to the presence of its valve.
Additionally, the wall of the implant will be denser than the center because the wall is made
of silicone elastomer that is denser than saline.
In contrast, a silicone implant will be uniformly dense, and no valve will be present.
Ultrasound imaging of implants
While ultrasound probes designed specifically for breast imaging provide superior imaging
of the breast tissue, they do not always allow sufficient penetration to fully evaluate a
more posteriorly positioned implant. An ultrasound machine with multiple probe choices is
therefore advantageous in the setting of implant evaluation.
MR imaging of silicone implants
Specific MRI protocols allow for the evaluation of implants, including silicone-only and
ilicone-suppression sequences.
MRI has a higher sensitivity and specificity for detecting silicone implant rupture than both
mammogram and ultrasound.
Overview of implant rupture
intacti implant
intracapsular rupture
extracapsular rupture
intact
ruptured
fibrous capsule
fibrous capsule
fibrous capsule
implant wall
ruptured
ruptured
implant wall
implant wall
Breast: 432