Transarterial chemoembolization (continued)
Common contraindications of TACE include:
Portal vein thrombosis (associated with post-treatment liver failure).
High tumor burden (>50%).
Extrahepatic metastases.
Decompensated cirrhosis encephalopathy, tension ascites, Child-Pugh C).
Elevated bilirubin (>3 mg/dL).
Pre-procedural cross-sectional imaging is usually performed for treatment planning, with
the goals of: evaluate for variant anatomy, extrahepatic collateral blood supply (i.e., right
phrenic artery), and possible contraindications.
Procedural steps:
After obtaining arterial access, celiac arteriogram is done to map out anatomy.
Selective or super-selective embolization can be done with the use of a catheter or micro-catheter into the
proximal arterial branches of a small tumor.
Alternatively, medications or embolic agents can be delivered from a proximal point (left or right hepatic
artery), called lobar embolization, if there are multiple lesions.
Materials are injected until stasis/low flow is seen under fluoroscopy.
Arteriography is performed to document persistent low flow or absence of flow to the region.
Immediate post-procedural CT imaging is usually avoided because normal post-procedural
changes may mimic an abscess.
TACE in a patient with recurrent HCC:
Selective DSA of celiac artery (top left image) shows
patent middle (green arrow) and left hepatic arteries
(yellow arrow). Superselective middle hepatic artery
with multifocal hypervascular tumor blushes (top right
image, red arrows). TACE of the middle hepatic artery
was performed with two vials of 100-300 micron
DEB loaded with 100 mg doxorubicin. Follow-up
angiography demonstrated pruning of distal arterial
branches and no residual tumor enhancement in the
embolized territory.
Case courtesy Arjun Sharma, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Post-embolization syndrome is very common after TACE. Symptoms include right upper
quadrant pain, fever, nausea, and vomiting. LFT may show transaminitis.
Other common complications include: abscess, acute liver failure, or biliary injuries (the
biliary tree is primarily supplied by hepatic arteries).
IR: 640