Osteogenesis imperfecta (0I)
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) represents a varied spectrum of disorders due to abnormal
type I collagen. There are 8 different types, with type I being the mildest and type II being
lethal. The remainder range from moderate to severe.
Clinical findings include blue sclera and hearing impairment due to otosclerosis. It is
important to note that a faint blue scleral tinge can also be transiently seen in normal
infants.
Key radiographic findings include multiple fractures in the ribs (causing characteristic
accordion ribs), vertebral bodies, and long bones. Additional findings include:
Bowed long bones.
Osteopenia.
Wormian bones in skull, secondary to non-coalesced ossification centers in the skull.
The differential diagnosis for multiple fractures includes OI, rickets and child abuse. Of these
three, OI is the only entity to cause antenatal fractures.
With rickets one would not expect antenatal injury. Fractures and osteopenia may be present.
With child abuse one would not expect osteopenia or antenatal injury. Fractures are typically present.
Stippled epiphyses
Several skeletal dysplasias and metabolic bone diseases can cause stippling of the epiphyses,
including:
Chondrodysplasia punctata, a short-limbed dwarfism (usually rhizomelic).
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (Fairbank disease), a mildly short limbed, autosomal dominant skeletal
dysplasia that usually manifests in late childhood or adolescence.
Hypothyroidism.
Complications of maternal warfarin use in a newborn.
Enchondromatoses
The enchondromatoses are characterized by multiple intra-osseous benign cartilaginous
tumors in an asymmetric distribution. These syndromes are associated with an increased
risk of malignant transformation to chondrosarcoma (Maffucci > Ollier).
Ollier disease is an enchondromatosis without associated abnormalities.
Maffucci syndrome is an enchondromatosis with venous malformations, which cause
phleboliths that are evident on radiography.
Lesions typically demonstrate rings-and-arc chondroid matrix and are most commonly found
within the hands and feet, and along the metaphyses of long bones.
Multiple hereditary exostoses osteochondromatosis)
Multiple hereditary exostoses is an autosomal dominant disorder of multiple benign
osteochondromas (also called exostoses), which are bony protuberances with
corticomedullary continuity growing from the metaphyses of long bones. Lesions are
directed away from the joint and most commonly occur in the distal femur, proximal femur
and proximal tibia.
Complications include pain, deformity, and malignant transformation into low-grade
chondrosarcoma (between 5-25% of cases).
In contrast to enchondromatoss, skeletal involvement is usually symmetric bilaterally.
Peds: 1175