Acute infarct (6 hours-72 hours)
The acute infarct phase is characterized by increase in vasogenic edema and mass effect.
Damaged vascular endothelial cells cause leakage of extracellular fluid and increase the risk
of hemorrhage.
On imaging, there is increased sulcal effacement and mass effect. The mass effect peaks at
3-4 days, which is an overlap time between the acute and early subacute phases.
MRI shows hyperintensity of the infarct core on T2-weighted images, best seen on FLAIR.
The FLAIR abnormality is usually confined to the gray matter. DWI continues to show
restricted diffusion.
There may be some arterial enhancement, due to increased collateral flow.
Perfusion images most commonly show increase in size of the infarct core with resultant
decrease in size of the penumbra.
Early subacute infarct (1.5 days-5 days)
In the early subacute phase, blood flow to the affected brain is re-established by
leptomeningeal collaterals and ingrowth of new vessels into the region of infarction.
The new vessels have an incomplete blood-brain barrier, causing a continued increase in
vasogenic edema and mass effect, which peaks at 3-4 days.
MR imaging shows marked hyperintensity on T2-weighted images involving both gray and
white matter (in contrast to the acute stage which usually involves just the gray matter).
The ADC map becomes less dark or even resolves if there is extensive edema; however, the
DWI images typically remain bright due to underlying T2 shine-through.
Perfusion imaging shows continued expansion of the infarct core and further reduction in
the ischemic penumbra.
Late subacute infarct (5 days-2 weeks)
The late subacute phase is characterized by resolution of vasogenic edema and reduction in
mass effect.
Al key imaging finding is gyriform enhancement, which may occasionally be confused for
a neoplasm. Unlike a tumor, however, a subacute infarction will not have mass effect.
Enhancement can be seen from approximately 6 days to 6 weeks after the initial infarct.
The enhancement of a subacute infarct has also been described by the "2-2-2" rule, which states that
enhancement begins at 2 days, peaks at 2 weeks, and disappears by 2 months.
DWI may remain bright due to T2 shine-through, although the ADC map will either return to
normal or show increased diffusivity.
Chronic infarct
In the chronic stage of infarction, cellular debris and dead brain tissue are removed by
macrophages and replaced by cystic encephalomalacia and gliosis.
Infarct involvement of the corticospinal tract may cause mass effect, mild hyperintensity on
T2-weighted images, and eventual atrophy of the ipsilateral cerebral peduncle and ventral
pons due to Wallerian degeneration. These changes can first be seen in the subacute phase,
with atrophy being the predominant feature in the chronic stage.
DWI has usually returned to normal in the chronic stage.
Occasionally, cortical laminar necrosis can develop instead of encephalomalacia.
Cortical laminar necrosis is a histologic finding characterized by deposition of lipid-laden
macrophages after ischemia that manifests on imaging as hyperintensity on both T1- and
T2-weighted images.
Neuro Brain: 678