NEUROIMAGING FUNDAMENTALS
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID (CSF) SPACES
Intra-axial and extra-axial compartments
An intra-axial lesion is within the brain parenchyma itself, underneath the pial membrane.
An extra-axial lesion is external to the pial membrane. The meninges and CSF spaces are
extra-axial.
The CSF spaces include the sulci, fissures, basal cisterns, and ventricles.
Sulcal/fissural anatomy
motor cortex
sensory cortex
(frontal lobe) central sulcus (parietal lobe)
paracentral
superior frontal sulcus
lobule
cingulate sulcus
marginal ran
(ofcingulate su
cingulate gyrus
motor cortex,
(frontal lobe)
ensory cortex
sulcus oftheconpuscalosum
parietal lobe)
pareto,ocptalsuu
er sulcus
merginairemus
(of cingulate sulcus)
The interhemispheric (medial longitudinal) fissure separates the two cerebral hemispheres
and contains the falx cerebri.
The central sulcus separates the primary motor cortex (precentral gyrus of frontal lobe)
from the primary somatosensory cortex (postcentral gyrus of parietal lobe).
To find the central sulcus on sagittal images, follow the cingulate sulcus posteriorly on a
slightly off-midline image (left image above). The cingulate sulcus ascends as the marginal
ramus (pars marginalis). Directly anterior to the marginal ramus is the paracentral lobule,
which is the medial continuation of both the precentral and postcentral gyri.
On axial images near the vertex (right image above), multiple signs can be used to localize
the central sulcus. The central sulcus forms an inverted omega () around the knob of
the hand motor cortex. One sulcus anterior is the precentral sulcus, which intersects the
superior frontal sulcus in an inverted Tshape. One sulcus posterior is the marginal ramus,
which opens to the internemispheric fissure and forms a curly bracket "f" shape facing
anteriorly.
The Sylvian fissure (lateral sulcus) separates the frontal and parietal lobes above from the
temporal lobe below. The parts of these lobes that border the Sylvian fissure and cover the
underlying insula are collectively termed the operculum.
The parieto-occipital sulcus/fissure separates the medial surfaces of the parietal lobe
(precuneus) and occipital lobe (cuneus).
Neuro Brain: 651