MASSIVE HEMOPTYSIS
Massive hemoptysis is defined as gross hemorrhage (typically 300-600 mL of blood in a
24-hour period) and can be a life-threatening emergency as a result of asphyxia rather than
hemorrhagic shock. Thus, nemodynamics is not a suitable measure for severity.
Most cases originate from the bronchial arteries as opposed to the lower-pressure
pulmonary-artery system.
Risk factors include smoking, cystic fibrosis or vasculitis.
The patient should be positioned with the affected lung down to improve oxygenation and
reduce fluid accumulation in the other lung.
Pre-procedure bronchoscopy or CTA are useful to localize the site of bleeding.
Bronchial artery embolization for hemoptysis
Coronal CT in a patient with hemoptysis shows a
Initial nonselective DSA aortography faintly opacifies
dominant right-sided thoracic mass abutting the
the common bronchial trunk (red arrow) and the two
mediastinum, causing narrowing of the SVC (arrow). right bronchial arteries (yellow arrows).
Massive hemoptysis caused by thoracic malignancy
treated with particle embolization of the common
bronchial artery trunk post-embolization images not
shown). In this case, the right bronchial arteries were
not able to be accessed. Due to the emergent nature
of the hemoptysis, the common bronchial trunk was
embolized to complete stasis with particles. There
was complete resolution of the active extravasation.
The mass was later shown to be a thymoma.
Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Selective angiography of the common bronchial
trunk shows multiple foci of active extravasation in
the right upper lobe (arrows).
Massive hemoptysis has a very high mortality, most commonly due to asphyxiation. The vast
majority (90%) of cases of hemoptysis involve the bronchial arteries, with the pulmonary
arteries involved in most of the rest of cases. Occasionally, other systemic arteries may be
involved, SO if a patient continues to bleed after evaluation of the bronchial and pulmonary
arterial circulation, the subclavian, internal mammary, inferior phrenic, and celiac arteries
should be evaluated as well.
Chronic inflammation can lead to hypertrophied bronchial arteries and subsequent
hemoptysis. In the United States, cystic fibrosis and thoracic malignancy are the most common
causes of hemoptysis. Worldwide, tuberculosis and fungal infection are more common.
IR: 607