DIFFUSE ASTROCYTIC AND OLIGODENDROGLAL TUMORS
Overview
Glioma, or glial neoplasm, is not a synonym for a "brain tumor" or a specific pathological
diagnosis but is often used loosely to indicate subtypes of primary brian tumors derived
from glial cells.
Diffuse gliomas, including subtypes from astrocytic and Oligodendroglal cell origins, are the
most common type of primary brain tumor in adults.
Characterized by their infiltrative growth, diffuse gliomas are rarely curable and therefore
are considered grade 2 to 4 by the World Health Organization (WHO). In contrast, WHO
grade 1, localized gliomas are generally curable by total resection.
"Low-grade glioma" usually refers to WHO grade 2 diffuse astrocytic and oligodendroglial
tumors, whereas "lower-grade glioma" refers to grades 2 and 3, and "high-grade glioma"
refers to grade 3 and 4 tumors in this category.
Since 2016, molecular data including IDH1/2 mutation and 1p/19q chromosomal co-deletion
status are considered with, and usually supersede, histological phenotype to form integrated
pathological diagnoses of diffuse glioma subtypes.
IDH-wildtype diffuse gliomas
Glioblastoma with MR perfusion: Axial post-contrast T1-weighted (left image) and T2-weighted (middle image)
MRI show a heterogeneous enhancing mass with central necrosis and surrounding edema/T2 prolongation
in the left parietal lobe. There is associated mildly elevated CBV in the non-necrotic peripheral components
(arrows, right image).
IDH-wildtype diffuse gliomas are most commonly diagnosed as glioblastoma, WHO grade 4.
In turn, most glioblastomas are IDH-wildtype, which confers a worse prognosis.
These tumors are usually primary glioblastomas, indicating they arise de novo rather than from an existing
lower-grade glioma.
Grade 2 or 3 IDH-wildtype diffuse gliomas are rare and treated as early glioblastoma as they rapidly
transform to grade 4 tumors.
DH-wildtype glioblastomas occur mostly in the elderly.
Glioblastoma is often abbreviated GBM, due to the historical term "glioblastoma
multiforme" describing the heterogeneous appearance of the tumor.
Neuro Brain: 708