Cavernous malformation (continued)
A cavernous malformation (also called a cavernoma) is a vascular hamartoma with a very
small but definite bleeding risk. The clinical course of a cavernous malformation is variable
and the lesion may cause seizures even in the absence of significant hemorrhage.
Cavernous malformation is often associated with an adjacent developmental venous
anomaly (DVA). There is increased risk of bleeding if a DVA is present. However, the DVA
itself does not have any bleeding risk.
Multiple, cavernous malformations represent an inherited disorder called familial cerebral
cavernous malformation syndrome.
Cavernous malformations can be induced by radiation treatment to the brain.
Noncontrast CT shows a wel-circumscribed rounded hyperattenuating lesion. The
hyperattenuation is due to microcalcification within the cavernoma.
MRI shows characteristic popcorn-like" appearance of lobular mixed signal on T1-
and T2-weighted images from blood products of various ages. There is a peripheral
rim of hemosiderin which is dark on GRE and T2-weighted image. There is typically no
enhancement, but intense enhancement may be seen with a long delay after contrast
administration. Cavernous malformations may range in size from tiny (single focus of
susceptibility artifact) to giant.
Cavernous malformations are usually occult by vascular imaging (CTA or angiography).
Developmental venous anomaly (DVA), also called venous angioma
T
Developmental venous anomaly and a tiny cavernous malformation: Post-contrast axial T1-weighted MRI
(left image) shows a subtle curvilinear enhancing structure (yellow arrows) in the right frontal white matter
representing a DVA. Susceptibility weighted image (right image) shows a focus of susceptibility artifact (red
arrow), suggestive of an adjacent cavernous malformation.
Case courtesy Sanjay Prabhu, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
A developmental venous anomaly (DVA) is an abnormal vein that provides functional venous
drainage to normal brain.
DVA can usually only be seen on contrast-enhanced or usceptiolitypwegnted images,
where it appears as a radially oriented vein with a characteristic caput medusa appearance.
A DVA is a Do Not Touch lesion. If resected, the patient will suffer a debilitating venous
infarct similar to acute thrombosis of DVA. The DVA must be preserved if an adjacent
cavernous malformation is resected.
Neuro Brain: 689