Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis may involve either the testis, the epididymis, or both. Scrotal involvement is
rare, but presents clinically as painless scrotal enlargement.
The ultrasound appearance of testicular sarcoid is indistinguishable from a solid malignant
mass. If sarcoidosis is suggested by clinical history, the testicular mass must be biopsied to
exclude malignancy. Without tissue pathology, a mass cannot be assumed to be sarcoid.
Benign testicular tumor mimics
Congenital adrenal rests are embryologic remnants of adrenal tissue trapped within the
testis. These are typically seen in newborns with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Adrenal rests appear as bilateral hypoechoic masses and classically enlarge with ACTH exposure.
oMorhasmaupernumeany testis: An extra testicle has an identical imaging appearance
to normal testicular parenchyma.
Extranumerary testes carry a slightly increased risk of torsion and testicular cancer.
EXTRA-TESTICULAR MASSES
In contrast to intratesticular masses, extratesticular masses are usually benign. Up to
16% of extratesticular masses may be malignant, however, and ultrasound cannot reliably
differentiate benign from malignant masses.
Benign extratesticular masses
Spermatic cord lipoma is the most common extratesticular neoplasm overall.
Benign adenomatoid tumor of the tunica albuginea is the most common epididymal
neoplasm.
THE "-CELES" AND CYSTIC LESIONS
Hydrocele
Al hydrocele is excess fluid in the scrotum surrounding the testicle. Most are asymptomatic.
Al hydrocele may be congenital (due to patent processus vaginalis in utero or infancy),
idiopathic, or post-inflammatory. Regardless of etiology, there is never fluid at the bare area
where the testicle is attached to the tunica vaginalis.
Hematocele
A hematocele is blood in the scrotum due to trauma or torsion.
Varicocele
Varicocele: Transverse grayscale ultrasound of the left scrotum (left image) shows dilated serpiginous vessels
posterior to the left testis, which demonstrate increased Doppler flow with Valsalva maneuver (right image).
A varicocele is a dilated venous pampiniform plexus in the scrotum.
A primary varicocele is due to incompetent valves of the internal spermatic vein. A
secondary (reactive) varicocele is due to increased venous pressure caused by obstruction,
usually caused by retroperitoneal mass.
GU: 291