Graves disease (continued)
Definitive treatment of Graves disease is I-131 radiotherapy or (less commonly) surgery.
Antithyroid drugs (e.g., methimazole or propylthiouracil) are another option and may
achieve a remission after one to two years of use.
Toxic multinodular goiter (Plummer disease)
Patients with toxic multinodular goiter are often middle-aged to elderly women and present
with symptoms of hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid scan shows an irregular, nodular thyroid contour and heterogeneous uptake
corresponding to single or multiple hot nodules with suppression of the remaining normal
functioning thyroid. lodine uptake is elevated.
Treatment options include medical therapy with antithyroid drugs for thyrotoxicosis, I-131
ablation, or thyroidectomy.
Malignancy is relatively uncommon in a multinodular goiter. While a dominant cold nodule
should undergo further investigation, smaller cold nodules are unlikely to be malignant.
Hashimoto thyroiditis
Hashimoto thyroiditis is the most common inflammatory disease of the thyroid.
Like Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis also clinically presents with thyromegaly. In
Hashimoto thyroiditis, however, thyroid hormone levels are variable depending on the
disease stage. Most patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis are hypothyroid.
Appearance on thyroid scan is variable, ranging from diffusely increased activity that
resembles Graves disease to patchy uptake similar to a multinodular goiter. The patchiness is
thought to be due to cold areas from infiltration by lymphocytes and lymphoid follicles.
Subacute thyroiditis
Subacute thyroiditis on I-123 scan with 0.22 mCi
administered.
There is diffusely low thyroid uptake with very low
background to thyroid uptake ratio. 24-hour uptake
was only 4.9%.
The classical clinical presentation of subacute thyroiditis is a painful swollen gland, although
many patients present with silent hyperthyroidism.
Imaging shows decreased radiotracer uptake and a low 24-hour uptake.
Subacute thyroiditis is typically a self-limited condition. Treatment is directed towards
symptom control with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids in severe cases.
Nucs: 459