CRYSTAL ARTHROPATHIES
Overview of crystal arthropathies
Crystalline arthropathies are a common form of arthritis caused by intra-articular
inflammation induced by the deposition of various crystals.
By far the two most common crystal arthropathies are calcium pyrophosphate crystal
arthritis and gout (caused by monosodium urate). While calcium hydroxyapatite usually
causes calcific tendinopathy, it much less commonly causes intra-articular inflammation.
Clinically, crystal arthropathies may mimic inflammatory arthropathy, septic arthritis, or
osteoarthritis.
Imaging plays a key role in diagnosis of crystal arthropathies, although arthrocentesis with
crystal analysis is the gold standard in ambiguous cases.
Calcium pyrophosphate manifests on imaging as chondrocalcinosis, which is deposition of calcium salts on
hyaline cartilage and fibrocartilage.
Gout has characteristic periarticular erosions with overhanging edges, and gouty tophi may manifest as
high attenuation soft tissue nodules or masses.
Hydroxyapatite appears as globular or amorphous mineralization (usually within a tendon) without
internal trabeculation.
Dual-energy CT can identify monosodium urate or calcium pyrophosphate.
Calcium pyrophosphate
The most common crystalline arthropathy is the arthritis caused by calcium pyrophosphate
(CPP). Microscopically, the rhomboid crystals of CPPD are positively birefringent.
Crystal deposition may be idiopathic (by far the most common) or associated with
hemochromatosis, yperparathyroidism, and nypophospnatasia.
Acute CPP arthritis describes the acute inflammatory phase of this condition, with a clinical
presentation that may mimic septic arthritis with acute pain, swelling, erythema, and
elevated inflammatory markers. Chronic CPP arthritis has been called the "great mimicker"
of other arthropathies, including osteoarthritis (most common), gout, and rheumatoid.
The hallmark radiographic finding of CPP arthritis is chondrocalcinosis, which is calcification
of hyaline (articular) or fibro meniscal/labral) cartilage. Radiographs of the knees, wrist, and
pelvis (pubic symphysis) are nearly 100% sensitive for the detection of chondrocalcinosis.
Importantly, chondrocalcinosis is a very common finding of unknown incidence seen in both
symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. Additionally, positive crystal analysis has been
reported in patients without radiographic chondrocalcinosis, especially in the early stages.
Therefore, the absence of chondrocalcinosis cannot exclude CPP arthritis, and the presence
of chondroclcinosis does not imply that the patient's pain is due to CPP arthritis.
On radiography and CT, chondrocalcinosis of the articular cartilage appears as thin,
linear calcifications of the articular cartilage, paralleling the subchondral bone plate.
Chondrocalcinosis of the fibrocartilage (e.g., menisci and labral) follows the course of the
fibrocartilage, with a thick and irregular or shaggy border. Calcium pyrophosphate may also
line ligaments and synovium, where it appears as an indistinct, cloud-like mineralization.
In the wrist, chondrocalcinosis tends to affect the triangular fibrocartilage complex
(TFCC). Advanced disease may lead to scapholunate advanced collapse (SLAC) wrist due to
destruction of the scapholunate ligament due to CPP-induced inflammation. SLAC wrist is
proximal migration of the capitate between the dissociated scaphoid and lunate, and may
also be seen in RA or trauma.
MSK: 923