After determining the intracranial compartment of the lesion, the differential can often be
narrowed further by specific location.
The most common cerebellopontine angle masses are vestibular schwannoma, meningioma, and
epidermoid cyst.
The most common pineal region tumors are germ cell tumors, such as germinoma, followed by pineal
parenchymal tumors, such as pineoblastoma.
The most common tumors involving the corpus callosum and crossing midline (butterfly tumors) are
primary central nervous system lymphoma and glioblastoma.
The most common cortical (rather than subcortical) supratentorial brain tumors are pleomorphic
anthoastrocytoma, dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor, oligodendroglioma, and ganglioglioma.
The most common primary central skull base tumors are chordoma and chondrosarcoma.
What is the age of the patient?
In combination with location, the differential may depend on whether the patient is a child
or adult.
The most common: suprasellar tumors are pituitary adenoma in adults and craniopharyngioma in children.
The most common posterior fossa tumors in adults are hemangioblastoma and metastases, whereas
in children the most common are pilocytic astrocytoma, medulloblastoma, ependymoma, and diffuse
midline/intrinsic pontine glioma.
The most common purely intraventricular masses in the atrium of the lateral ventricle are meningioma
and degenerative choroid plexus yst/anthogranuloma in adults and choroid plexus papilloma in children.
The most common mass of thei foramen of Monro in adults is colloid cyst, whereas the most common in
children is subependymal giant cell astrocytoma.
What are the signal/attenvation and enhancement characteristics of the lesion?
As previously described, most brain lesions are hyperintense on T2-weighted images
and hypointense on T1-weighted images. MRI signal characteristics are most helpful if a
lesion is either hypointense with T2/T2"-weighting (due to hypercellularity, hemorrhage,
calcification, or proteinaceous fluid) or hyperintense with T1-weighting (due to fat,
hemorrhage, melanin, or proteinaceous fluid).
On noncontrast CT, most tumors fall within a range of brain/soft tissue attenuation and may
be difficult to detect in the absence of surrounding edema. More marked hyperattenuation
on CT may be due to hemorrhage or calcification, while more marked hypoattenuation may
be due to cystic or necrotic components or fat.
Contrast enhancement occurs in the vast majority of extra-axial and non-glial intra-axial
neoplasms. Among gliomas, non-enhancing tumor is more likely to reflect lower histologic
grade, but this correspondence is not entirely reliable: high-grade gliomas may not
enhance in a third of cases and certain low-grade neoplasms like pilocytic astrocytoma and
gangliogliomas show enhancement.
Fat is characteristic of a few lesions: lipoma, dermoid cyst, and teratoma. Rarely,
meningioma may show fatty metaplasia (lipomatous meningioma).
Calcifications are found in a minority of certain common tumors but some less common
lesions nearly always have calcifications.
The most common extra-axial tumor that may calcify is meningioma. The vast majority of
craniopharyngiomas are calcified.
The most common intra-axial tumori that may calcify is astrocytoma. The vast majority of
oligodendrogliomas are calcified.
Intracranial calcifications are most commonly physiologi/agngreated rather than tumoral, such as in the
choroid plexus, pineal gland, and dura of the tentorium and falx cerebri. However, these can be helpful in
localizing tumors based on their displacement: a tumor that engulfs pineal calcifications is more likely a
germ cell tumor, while one that disperses pineal calcifications to the periphery is more likely to be a pineal
parenchymal tumor.
Neuro Brain: 706