BREAST INTERVENTIONS
Overview of breast interventions
Regardless of the method of biopsy, the radiologist must perform a radiology-pathology
correlation of every case to ensure that the pathologic diagnosis is concordant with the
imaging findings. Discordant findings should receive further workup, typically requiring
repeat biopsy, either core or excisional. An example of a discordant finding is benign
pathology (e.g., fragments of a fibroadenoma) for a highly suspicious, spiculated mass.
PERCUTANEOUS NEEDLE BIOPSY
Ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy
%
1 POST
Left 7:00 N+ 3-4 CM rad
LEFT 7:00 Trans N + 3-4 cm CORE BX
Pre-procedure ultrasound demonstrates a
Post-fire image from an ultrasound-guided core
shadowing, spiculated mass (calipers) with taller-
needle biopsy shows the core needle traversing the
than-wide orientation that is highly suspicious.
lesion with an appropriate shallow angle of approach.
Uitrasound-guided core needle biopsy is the preferred approach for a lesion that is well seen
on ultrasound. Ultrasound-guided biopsy using standard freehand technique and a 14-gauge
spring-loaded needle is a highly accurate method to biopsy breast masses.
Ultrasound-guided interventions are the most user-dependent and take time to master.
Appropriate initial positioning of the patient and planning of the approach allows a smooth
procedure. Some practitioners always hold the ultrasound probe in the non-dominant hand
to allow the dominant hand control over the needle. Others take an ambidextrous approach.
A lateral approach to the lesion is generally preferred. It is critical when performing an
ultrasound-guided procedure to always keep the biopsy device parallel to the chest wall, or
at a very shallow angle of obliquity. A standard breast biopsy needle advances approximately
2 cm when sampling. Far posterior lesions can be entered with the tip of the biopsy device
and lifted anteriorly off the chest wall before sampling.
Posterior lesions require a larger distance between the lesion and the entry site to
maintain a nearly parallel biopsy needle course. Once an entry site is chosen, cutaneous
and subcutaneous anesthesia is administered under ultrasound guidance and a small skin
incision is made. Each needle pass should be documented and needle positioning within the
target demonstrated in an orthogonal plane for at least 1-2 passes.
After adequate sampling, a tissue marker is typically placed, and post-procedure
mammography is performed to confirm marker position within the targeted lesion.
Breast: 439