Congenital lobar hyperinflation (CLH) / Congenital lobar emphysema (CLE)
Congenital lobar hyperinflation: Chest radiograph (left image) shows a hyperlucent right lung with scant
vascular markings and mediastinal: shift to the left. Axial CT (right) shows a massively hyperexpanded right
middle lobe, which has herniated across midline and exerts mass effect on the heart and bilateral lower lobes.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Congenital lobar hyperinflation (CLH) or overinflation (CLO), formerly congenital lobar
emphysema (CLE), is a syndrome of lobar air trapping caused by intrinsic or extrinsic
bronchial narrowing without associated destruction of lung parenchyma.
The most common cause of CLH is bronchomalacia, which results in airway collapse on
expiration, leading to hyperinflation. CT can be performed to evaluate for a cause of
bronchial obstruction, which is only found in about half of the cases of CLH.
CLH usually involves the upper and middle lobes.
In the pre-natal period, CLH is initially fluid-filled and appears as an echogenic mass.
Post-natally and as fluid clears, CLH appears as a hyperlucent and hyperexpanded lobe that
can exert mass effect on surrounding structures and result in mediastinal shift. It is essential
not to mistake CLH for a tension pneumothorax, as a chest tube will increase respiratory
distress.
Bronchial atresia
Bronchial atresia: Coronal CT shows
hyperlucency of the left lower lobe (yellow
arrows). There is a globular, well-defined
opacity (red arrow) in the left lower lobe
representing a mucocele of the atretic left
lower lobe bronchus. This case is slightly
atypical in that the left lower lobe is affected.
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham
and Women's Hospital.
Bronchial atresia is interruption of a lobar, segmental or subsegmental bronchus with
resultant blind-ended bronchus and associated distal mucus impaction and hyperinflation.
The left upper lobe is the most commonly affected.
Bronchial atresia is usually incidentally diagnosed in adults and may be related to CLH in
etiology.
Peds: 1099