ACUTE AORTIC SYNDROME
OVERVIEW OF ACUTE AORTIC SYNDROME
Acute aortic syndrome represents a clinical spectrum of related diseases that are
characterized by damage to at least one component of the aortic wall, and present as severe
chest pain.
Aortic dissection: A defect in the intima where the blood enters and extends to media.
Aortic intramural hematoma (IMH): Media defect with vasa-vasorum hemorrhage into the wall.
Penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer (PAU): Intimal defect as a result of atherosclerotic lesion.
The treatment of acute aortic syndrome depends primarily on the location (ascending
versus non-ascending aorta) and is often the same regardless of the underlying etiology.
Ascending aorta: Treatment is most commonly surgical.
Descending aorta: Treatment is most commonly medical (blood pressure control).
Imaging of the full aorta is generally required in any acute aortic pathology.
First-line imaging modality is CT and includes a) noncontrast chest CT and b) ECG-gated CT angiogram
(CTA) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
If patient is stable and cannot get CTA, MR angiogram (MRA) can be considered including fast noncontrast
techniques (e.g., SSFP), and post-contrast MRA of the chest, abdomen and pelvis.
AORTIC DISSECTION
adventitia
media
false lumen
intima
true lumen
Intima is disrupted, typically by an ulcerative plaque, trauma, or aneurysm.
Ani intimomedial flap is created.
Ther media is"dissected". and expanded by either thet false lumen (if blood ist flowing) or intramural hematoma (ifi filled with clot).
Blood flowi is slower in the false lumen, leading to thrombosis.
Blood exits thef false lumen via a re-entry tear. Typically, the re-entry tear obstructs the outflow leading to higher pressures in the
false lumen. This pressure differential contributes to compression oft the true lumen and differences in contrast
opacification between thet true and falsel lumens.
The key feature of dissection is a disruption in the intima, which allows high-pressure blood
to infiltrate and expand the media.
The most common risk factor for aortic dissection is hypertension, but other risk factors include
connective tissue disorders (especially Marfan syndrome), cocaine use, aortopathy associated with
al bicuspid aortic valve, weight lifting, and sudden deceleration injury. Aortic dissection secondary to
atherosclerosis is more commonly type B (descending aorta).
The true lumen is often smaller with outer wall calcifications.
The false lumen is often the larger lumen and has lower contrast density on arterial phase.
The false lumen can become thrombosed, with beak sign and cobweb sign.
The classification of aortic dissection is the Stanford classification, which divides dissection
into types A (ascending aorta) and B (non-ascending aorta). Type A is typically treated
surgically, and type B is typically treated medically.
Vascular: 543