Common sites of saccular aneurysms
Anterior communicating artery (A-comm) aneurysms: Patients most commonly present with
subarachnoid hemorrhage, frequently in the internemispheric fissure. A-comm aneurysms
are also associated with intraventricular hemorrhage, most commonly the lateral ventricles.
Anterior cerebral artery (ACA) is the most common location for aneurysms associated with
intracerebral hemorrhage.
Internal carotid artery (ICA) aneurysms are named based on which segment it arises from.
Cavernous ICA aneurysms are extradural, when nontraumatic are usually fusiform and expand laterally
into the cavernous sinus. Typical presentation is with CN III, IV, VI palsy. Rupture can produce a carotid-
cavernous fistula or severe epistaxis from blood extrusion into the sphenoid sinus.
Paraclinoid ICA aneurysms are classically distal to the dural ring (therefore intradural) and include
ophthalmic and superior hypophyseal aneurysms. There is anatomic variability which results in some
superior hypophyseal aneurysms and a minority of ophthalmic aneurysms being intradural.
Supraclinoid ICA aneurysms include posterior communicating artery (P-comm) and anterior choroidal
aneurysms. P-comm aneurysms arise. just distal to the P-comm ostium and project posterolaterally, which
may impact cranial nerve III with classic presentation of pupil-sparing CN III palsy.
Carotid bifurcation or terminus aneurysms occur at the point where the ICA divides into the MCA and ACA.
These aneurysms present with subarachnoid hemorrhage and generally point superiorly.
Most middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysms occur at the M1 bifurcation, which is the
second most common location for aneurysm presenting with intracerebral hemorrhage.
Basilar tip aneurysms classically produce subarachnoid hemorrhage centered in the
interpeduncular cistern with extension to the suprasellar and anterior and posterior
perimesencephalic cisterns.
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) aneurysms present with subarachnoid hemorrhage
and clinically can present with localized head and neck ache, meningismus, and CN VI
palsy. Presence of apparently isolated intraventricular hemorrhage in the fourth ventricle is
suggestive of PICA aneurysm.
Fusiform aneurysm
A fusiform aneurysm is a type of intracranial aneurysm characterized by an elongated
fusiform shape, without a defined neck. Fusiform aneurysms are usually due to
atherosclerosis, but may arise from chronic dissection.
In contrast to saccular aneurysms, fusiform aneurysms do not occur at branch points.
The vertebrobasilar system is affected more commonly than the anterior circulation.
Fusiform aneurysms are much less common than saccular aneurysms. However, since there
is no aneurysm neck to exclude from the systemic circulation, fusiform aneurysms are
more difficult to treat. Fusiform aneurysms of the vertebrobasilar system pose particular
challenges, as critical perforating vessels may arise directly from the diseased artery.
Neuro Brain: 684