Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD; continued)
Typical NMOSD myelitis lesions are T2-hyperintense ("bright spotty lesion" with areas
more hyperintense than CSF), longitudinally extensive (extending >3 contiguous vertebral
segments), and transversally extensive (involving a majority of the cord in cross-section).
Cord swelling and patchy or ring-ennancement occurs in the acute phase, followed by
atrophy after treatment. The cervicothoracic cord is predominantly involved.
Typical NMOSD optic neuritis appears as T2-hyperintense or enhancing lesions extending
over more than half of the optic nerve length. The posterior optic nerve is predominantly
involved, usually bilaterally and extending to the optic chiasm.
Less commonly, brain lesions can occur in NMOSD, predominantly distributed in
periependymal areas such as the area postrema (dorsal medulla), ventricles, and cerebral
aqueduct.
Anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody-associated disease
Anti-MOG IgG antibody-associated disease overlaps clinically with NMOSD, presenting as
optic neuritis and/or myelitis. Patients are seronegative for aquaporin-4 antibodies.
Spinal cord lesions are T2 hyperintense, longitudinally extensive, and transversally extensive,
similar to those in NMOSD. However, the thoracolumbar cord including conus medullaris is
preferentially involved.
Optic nerve lesions demonstrate extensive bilateral T2 hyperintensity, as with NMOSD.
However, the anterior optic nerve is preferentially involved and there may be associated
perioptic nerve sheath enhancement.
Brain MRI is normal in most cases but sometimes shows lesions in deep gray matter (basal
ganglia, thalami) and infratentorial regions (pons and cerebellar peduncles), with patchy
"cloud-like" enhancement.
Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelitis is the clinical syndrome of acute or subacute neurologic dysfunction
(sensory, motor, or autonomic) below the level of an inflammatory spinal cord lesion.
Transverse myelitis can be diopathic/solated or a part of other diseases such as MS, ADEM,
NMOSD, anti-MOG antibody-associated disease, CNS infection, sarcoidosis, and connective
tissue diseases (e.g. lupus).
Imaging findings include spinal cord enlargement with edema and patchy enhancement.
Acute flaccid myelitis
Acute flaccid myelitis is a polio-like illness of children, presenting with a viral prodrome
followed by rapid onset weakness in a lower motor neuron pattern. Outbreaks of
enterovirus D68 are implicated.
MRI demonstrates T2 prolongation within the spinal cord gray matter spanning 21 vertebral
segments.
Spine: 865