APPENDIX
Appendicitis
Appendicitis: Coronal (left image) and axial (right image) contrastenhanced CT shows a large focus of
inflammatory stranding centered around the appendix in the right lower quadrant (yellow arrow). The margins
of the appendix itself are indistinct and there is the suggestion of an early fluid collection (blue arrows). Note
the two appendicoliths within the appendix (red arrows).
Appendicitis is the most common cause of acute abdomen. Acute inflammation of the
appendix is thought to be due to obstruction of the appendiceal lumen by an appendicolith,
fecal debris, or a mass, leading to venous congestion, mural ischemia, and bacterial
translocation.
Appendicitis represents a spectrum of severity ranging from tip appendicitis (inflammation
isolated to the distal appendix) to gangrenousperforated appendicitis with abscess if the
disease is not diagnosed until late.
For an adult with RLQ (right lower quadrant) pain and suspected appendicitis, CT is the
preferred imaging modality. For a pediatric patient, ultrasound is first line. For pregnant
women, ultrasound or MRI may be the most appropriate.
maging of appendicitis relies on direct and indirect imaging findings.
Direct findings of appendicitis are due to abnormalities of the appendix itself:
Distended, fluid-filled appendix: 6 mm is used as cutoff for normal diameter of the appendix, although
there is wide normal variability and 6 mm is from the ultrasound literature using compression. A normal
appendix distended with air can measure >6 mm; therefore, some authors advocate using caution with a
numeric cutoff in an otherwise normal-appearing appendix filled with air or enteric contrast.
Appendiceal wall-thickening or hyperenhancement.
Appendicolith, which may be a cause of luminal obstruction; however, appendicoliths are commonly
seen without associated appendicitis.
Indirect findings of appendicitis are due to the spread of inflammation to adjacent sites:
Periappendiceal fat stranding.
Hydroureter.
Cecal wall thickening.
Small bowel ileus.
GI: 210