Spinal cord herniation (continued)
Cord herniation is a cause of myelopathy when the spinal cord plugs and protrudes through
a dural defect, usually ventrally involving the thoracic cord.
Cord herniation is typically diopathic but can be related to prior trauma or surgery.
MRI or CT myelography shows an anteriorly displaced and focally kinked or C-shaped spinal
cord with interruption of the ventral CSF space. Soft tissue may be seen extending into the
epidural space.
The differential diagnosis includes intradural extramedullary lesions that appear as a
widened dorsal CSF space such as arachnoid web and arachnoid cyst.
INTRADURAL EXTRAMEDULLARY SPINAL INFECTIOUS/INFLAMMATORY LESIONS
Arachnoiditis
Arachnoiditis is inflammation of the spinal leptomeninges, which can produce fibrous
adhesions involving the subarachnoid space or dura.
The most common cause is lumbar spine surgery; arachnoiditis is an occasional cause of
failed back surgery syndrome (recurrent or persistent pain after surgery). Other causes
include infection (e.g. tuberculosis) and chemical injury via intrathecal injection (e.g.
steroids, anesthetic).
The primary imaging feature of lumbar adhesive arachnoiditis is displacement of the cauda
equina nerve roots. Three patterns have been described:
Group 1: Central conglomerations of nerve roots within the thecal sac.
Group 2: Peripheral clumping of nerve roots, causing the empty thecal sac sign.
Group 3: Obliteration of the subarachnoid space. Imaging shows increased soft tissue within the thecal
sac. This is the most severe form of arachnoiditis.
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Guillain-Barré syndrome is most commonly an acute inflammatory, demyelinating
polyneuropathy (AIDP) characterized by symmetric weakness and diminished reflexes with
classically ascending distal-to-proxima, progression over several weeks.
The mechanism is characterized by an antecedent infection evoking an immune response.
The most common preceding infection is Campylobacter jejuni.
Spinal MRI shows enhancement and thickening of cauda equina nerve roots.
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP)
CIDP is an acquired immune-mediated neuropathy most commonly characterized by
symmetric sensorimotor proximal and distal involvement, with a progressive or recurrent
course lasting at least several months.
MRI shows enhancement and thickening of affected spinal nerve roots (sometimes
intradural such as cauda equina but more often extradural), plexi, and peripheral nerves.
Spine: 878