Fungal abscess
Splenic fungal abscesses are typically multiple and small, usually <1 cm in size. Almost all
patients with splenic fungal abscesses are immunocompromised.
The most common causative agents include Candida, Aspergillus, and Cryptococcus, all of
which have a common appearance of multiple tiny hypoattenuating foci on CT.
Splenic Pneumocystis, jiroveci (formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii) infection is rare,
almost always seen in advanced AIDS, and has a classic appearance of multiple calcified
splenic lesions.
Echinococcal cyst
Splenic involvement of Echinococcus granulosus infection is unusual, seen in only 1-3% of
echinococcal infections, and is almost always associated with infection of other organs as
well.
An echinococcal cyst is a true cyst with a cellular lining. As with echinococcal abscesses
elsewhere, characteristic imaging findings are a cystic lesion with internal undulating
membrane and daughter cysts.
MALIGNANT SPLENIC LESIONS
Splenic lymphoma
Splenic ymphoma is the most common splenic malignancy.
Primary splenic lymphoma is rare, accounting for less than 1% of all cases of lymphoma,
and usually presents as a solitary hypovascular mass. In contrast to splenic hamartoma or
metastatic disease, primary splenic lymphoma may extend beyond the splenic capsule and
involve adjacent organs.
Secondary splenic involvement of systemic lymphoma is much more common. Four imaging
presentations have been described, depending on the size of the ymphomatous masses:
Miliary masses, in which discrete tiny masses may be difficult to see.
Multiple small- to moderate-sized masses.
One large mass.
Splenomegaly without discrete mass.
Conspicuity is highest on post-contrast T1-weighted images, where the involved portion of
the spleen tends to be hypoenhancing.
On ultrasound, lymphoma may appear cystic, but color Doppler shows internal flow.
Splenic metastasis
Splenic metastasis from lung cancer: Contrast-
enhanced axial CT shows a hypoattenuating,
irregular mass in the inferior anterior aspect
of the spleen (arrows) demonstrating wispy,
heterogeneous enhancement.
Case courtesy Chery!. Sadow, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
GI: 168