Oral cavity SCC
SCC is the most common malignancy which occurs in the oral cavity and risk factors are
similar to SCC of other subsites, such as smoking, chewing tobacco, and HPV exposure,
although HPV exposure is much less strongly associated in comparison to oropharyngeal
SCC.
The lip is the most common site of SCC of the oral cavity. Many of these lesions are easily
assessed through direct inspection and imaging is indicated to evaluate for osseous invasion
or lymph node metastases.
Oral cavity SCC staging is also largely based on the size of the lesion for determination of
T1-T3 and unlike oropharyngeal SCC, there is only one staging scheme.
Key areas to evaluate in staging of oral cavity SCC include evaluating for mandibular/
maxillary invasion and involvement of the retromolar trigone. Involvement of the
retromolar trigone cannot be determined clinically and provides access to numerous
routes of spread. Other key areas of involvement include the pterygomandibular raphe,
which provides access to the floor of the mouth and masticator space, extension to the
oropharynx, extension to the larynx.
For primary oral tongue lesions, it is important to assess for extension across midline and
involvement of the intrinsic muscles of the tongue.
Dermoid/epidermoid
A dermoid is a teratomatous lesion which contains at least two germ cell layers, while an
epidermoid contains only ectoderm.
On CT, both dermoid and epidermoid will appear as a fluid-attenuation lesion, most
commonly in the midline of the floor of the mouth. A pathognomonic MRI finding of
dermoid is the sack of marbles appearance resulting from floating fat globules. In the
absence of this finding, epidermoid and dermoid can be indistinguishable in this location on
MRI.
Ranula
A ranula is a mucous retention cyst that
arises from the sublingual gland as a sequela
of inflammation. All ranulas arise from the
sublingual gland or adjacent minor salivary
glands and hence begin in the sublingual
space.
A plunging ranula extends from the
sublingual space into the submandibular
space by protruding posteriorly over the
free edge of the mylohyoid or by extending
directly through a defect in the mylohyoid.
Ranula: Contrast-enhanced axial CT at the level of
A dermoid cyst may also present below the the mandible shows a cystic lesion (arrow) in the left
mandible, but is typically midline, rather than sublingual space.
the eccentric location of a plunging ranula.
Neuro Head & Neck: 837