COLITIS
Overview of colitis
Colitis is inflammation of the colon that
may be caused by several unrelated
etiologies, often with overlapping
imaging findings.
The primary imaging feature of colitis
is wall thickening. Generally, a full
clinical evaluation, stool studies, and
sometimes colonic biopsy are required Pan colitis: Contrast-enhanced CT shows severe mural
for a definitive diagnosis of the
thickening of the entire visualized colon (arrows) with
causative etiology.
mucosal hyperenhancement. Although nonspecific, this was
a case of pseudomembranous colitis.
Ischemic colitis
Colonic ischemia can be caused by acute arterial thrombus, chronic arterial stenosis, low-
flow states (e.g., congestive heart failure), and venous thrombosis.
The splenic flexure is the watershed region between the superior and inferior mesenteric
arteries and is especially susceptible to ischemia in low-flow states.
The rectum is supplied by a dual blood supply and is almost never affected by ischemia.
The superior rectal artery (terminal branch of the IMA) and the inferior and middle rectal
arteries (arising from the internal iliac artery anterior division) form perirectal collaterals.
CT findings suggestive of ischemic colitis are segmental thickening of the affected colon in a
vascular distribution, with sparing of the rectum.
If arterial thromboembolic disease is suspected, one should evaluate for the presence of aortic
atherosclerotic disease or a left atrial thrombus in the setting of atrial fibrillation.
If chronic arterial stenosis is suspected, one should evaluate for atherosclerosis of the mesenteric vessels.
Infectious colitis
Infectious colitis can be bacterial, mycobacterial, viral, fungal, or amebic. There is significant
overlap in the clinical presentation and imaging findings of the various pathogens.
In general, infectious colitis features pericolonic stranding and ascites in addition to the
colonic wall thickening seen in all forms of colitis.
Versinia, Salmonella, and colonic TB tend to affect the right colon. TB is known to involve the
ileocecal valve, resulting in a desmoplastic reaction that mimics Crohn's disease.
E. coli, CMV, and C. difficile colitis (discussed below) most commonly cause pancolitis.
GI: 214