Stochastic effects
Stochastic effects are random and carcinogenic. Stochastic effects arise after
a latent period of several years. As the dose to an individual increases, there
is an increased risk of developing cancer. Complicating the determination of a
stochastic risk is the fact that cancer is a very common disease, there is a low
level of background radiation present, and most people who receive medical
radiation exposures do not have any ill effects.
The risk of a stochastic effect depends on the dose, dose rate, and type of
tissue exposed.
The linear no threshold model is believed to provide the most accurate risk
assessment for development of solid tumors, with a latency up to 25 years.
The linear no threshold model assumes that there is no threshold required
for a stochastic effect, and the risk of cancer increases linear with increasing
exposure.
The near-quadratic function of dose is thought to best characterize the risk of
developing leukemia, with a latency of 5-7 years.
Radiation-induced cancer
Acute radiation exposure carries a risk of developing cancer of approximately
8%/Gy, based on Japanese nuclear bomb survivors.
Fori instance, a 24% increase in cancer risk would require 4 Gy acutely (8 *4 = 24%).
The risk of leukemia is approximately 1%/Sv for an acute dose.
Chronic exposure (e.g., radiation worker) carries a risk of cancer of 4%/Gy.
Relative radiosensitivities
The thyroid gland is the most radiosensitive tissue in the human body.
cupational/latrogents
Ankylosing spondylitis (treated with X-rays) - leukemia
exposures and effects
Fluoroscopy for tuberculosis - breast cancer
Marshall island inhabitants (nuclear weapon testing) 4 thyroid tumors
Miners (especially uranium) - lung cancer, due to breathing radon
Dial painters * bone sarcomas and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (lick radium on
brushes)
Radiation effects on the
Weeks 0-2 pre-implantation): 'all-or-nothing": abortion likely after significant
fetus
exposure
These effects are for
significant exposure (e.g.,
Weeks 2-6: congenital abnormalities
2 Gy)
T Risk of neonatal death (death at or about the time of birth)
Weeks 8-15: Risk of mental retardation 40%/Sv
T Risk of childhood cancer
T Risk of reduced head diameter
Weeks 15-25: Risk of mental retardation 10%/Sv
T Risk of childhood cancer
Fetal dose
Dose limit: 0.5 mSv/month allowed (-5 mSv/pregnancy)
(Pregnant radiation
Lead apron attenuates externally measured dose by a factor of 20
dose
workers)
(fetal
would be further reduced by factor of two due to mother's overlying tissues)
Physics: 1213