CYSTIC RENAL LESIONS
Hydronephrosis- Hydronephrosis is the most common cystic abdominal mass in a neonate.
Multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK)
Multicystic dysplastic kidney: Two longitudinal ultrasound images of the kidney show multiple separate cystic
structures that do not connect. The main differential consideration is hydronephrosis, in which case the cystic
spaces would demonstrate continuity.
Multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK) is the most common neonatal cystic renal mass,
characterized by a progressive renal dysplasia thought to be a result of abnormal induction
of the metanephric blastema by the ureteric bud, or due to atresia of the renal pelvis/
proximal ureter leading to urinary obstruction.
MCDK is typically unilateral, but bilateral abnormalities may be present in 20-30%.
The natural progression of MCDK is gradual involution into a small soft tissue remnant. It
is thought that many adults with a solitary kidney may have had a previously undiagnosed,
involuted MCDK.
The risk of Wilms tumor in MCDK is controversial. Although an association between MCDK
and Wilms tumor has been reported, there is no strong evidence to support a link.
Imaging of MCDK shows a multicystic "mass" replacing the renal parenchyma. The cystic
elements do not communicate with each other, which is in contrast to hydronephrosis.
A DMSA scan shows no cortical uptake in MCDK, compared to faint radiotracer cortical uptake even in
hydronephrosis.
Multilocular cystic nephroma
Multilocular cystic nephroma is a benign, multiseptated cystic neoplasm. It has a bimodal
age distribution, seen in young boys aged three months to two years and middle-aged
women.
There is an association with DICER1 mutations and pleuropulmonary blastoma.
On imaging, multilocular cystic nephroma appears as a multiseptated cystic renal mass with
enhancing septa. Its appearance may mimic cystic Wilms tumor. A characteristic imaging
finding is the propensity to herniate into the renal pelvis, causing hydronephrosis.
Peds: 1149