TORCH infections: Syphilis
Syphilis is caused by the spirochete Treponema pallidum. Syphilis can be transmitted in
utero through the placenta to cause congenital syphilitic osteomyelitis.
The Wimberger sign is destructive erosion of the medial aspect of the proximal tibial
metaphysis. The Wimberger sign is not to be confused with the Wimberger ring sign of
scurvy, which is increased density of the ossification centers.
Syphilis is one of many causes of symmetric periosteal reaction in a child.
Wimberger. sign in congenital
syphilis:
Magnified frontal leg radiograph
shows a deep erosion of the
medial aspect of the proximal
tibia (yellow arrow), representing
the Wimberger sign. There is
also periosteal reaction along the
partially visualized tibial diaphysis
(red arrows).
CHILDHOOD ARTHRITIS
Juvenile idopathic arthritis (JIA) / juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) / juvenile chronic arthritis (JCA)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), also known as juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) and
juvenile chronic arthritis (JCA), is the most common chronic arthropathy of childhood. It is
a systemic idiopathic disease defined as being present for more than 6 weeks in a patient
younger than 16 years old. JIA is usually rheumatoid-factor negative.
The most common subtype of JIA is pauciarticular disease, typically affecting young girls.
Regardless of subtype, the knee is the most commonly affected joint, but any joint can be
affected.
The imaging appearance reflects the underlying pathophysiology of synovitis, as the
earliest radiographic changes are joint effusion, soft tissue swelling, and periarticular
demineralization. Later changes include joint space narrowing, periostitis and erosions.
Chronic disease leads to eventual joint ankylosis, which is in contrast to adult rheumatoid
arthritis, where ankylosis is rare. The most common sites of ankylosis are in the wrist, at the
carpometacarpal. joints, and the cervical spine.
Cervical spine ankylosis in a child may appear: similar to Klippel-Feil syndrome. In contrast to Klippel-Feil,
JIA does not feature segmentation anomalies.
Accelerated skeletal maturation and accelerated bone growth are caused by synovitis and
hyperemia, which lead to premature fusion of the physes and/or abnormal bone growth.
Still disease is an acute systemic subtype of JIA affecting children under the age of 5. Still
disease presents with fever, anemia, leukocytosis, hepatosplenomegaly, and polyarthritis.
Boys and girls are affected equally.
Peds: 1172