ENDOMETRIOMA
Endometriomas, also referred to as endometriotic cysts, represent ectopic endometrial
tissue implanted on the adnexa. As endometrial tissue is hormonally responsive, an
endometrioma may be composed of blood products of varying ages (chocolate cyst).
They can be solitary but bilateral ovarian involvement is common (30-50%) and increases
specificity for the diagnosis of endometriosis.
Endometriomas can rupture as a result of rapid growth, particularly during pregnancy, which
can lead to acute pelvic pain and hemoperitoneum. They can lead to adhesions, tethering
of bowel loops, and obliteration of the fat planes. Another rare complication is malignant
degeneration into endometrioid or less commonly clear cell subtypes of ovarian cancer.
On ultrasound, an endometrioma may represent as a well-defined complex cyst with
homogeneous low-level internal echoes and posterior acoustic enhancement. Occasionally
an endometrioma may appear similar to a neoplasm.
Endometrioma on ultrasound:
Coronal grayscale ultrasound demonstrates
a right ovarian mass with uniform low-
level internal echoes, posterior acoustic
enhancement (arrows), and no internal flow
on color Doppler.
MRI typically shows multiple T1 hyperintense masses (due to hemorrhagic content) which
demonstrate signal gradient ("shading") on T2-weighted images. Endometriomas - unlike
dermoids = do not suppress on fat-saturated sequences. Less commonly, endometriosis may
appear hyperintense on both T1- and T2-weighted images.
Tiny hemorrhagic endometrial implants may be apparent as hyperintense foci on T1-weighted images.
Laparoscopy is the gold standard for the diagnosis of suspected endometriosis, with
implants appearing as small areas of tissue distortion with hemorrhagic spots or large
masses with associated adhesions.
Endometriomas on MRI: Axial fat-suppressed T1-weighted MRI (left image) shows bilateral T1 hyperintense
ovarian lesions in direct contact (kissing ovaries sign). The T2-weighted axial MRI (right image) demonstrates
characteristic dependent shading (arrows). Case courtesy Chery! Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
GU: 318