ESOPHAGITIS
Reflux (peptic) esophagitis
Reflux (peptic) esophagitis is caused by gastroesophageal reflux leading to the exposure of
the esophageal mucosa to acidic gastric secretions, which may lead to distal ulcerations and
eventual stricture as well as the development of Barrett's esophagus.
Peptic esophagitis is most commonly caused by an
incompetent lower esophageal sphincter but may also be
seen in:
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, due to increased acid production.
Scleroderma, due to gastroesophageal sphincter fibrosis and
resultant incompetence.
Fluoroscopic findings of reflux esophagitis are usually seen
in the distal esophagus and are best demonstrated on
double-contrast images. These findings include:
Mucosal granularity.
Thickened folds.
Erosions (may be solitary or multiple, typically on posterior wall).
Strictures.
Thickened esophageal folds in reflux
esophagitis.
Barrett's esophagus
An important long-term sequela of peptic esophagitis is Barrett's esophagus, which is
metaplasia of normal squamous epithelium to gastric-type adenomatous mucosa. Barrett's
esophagus is a precursor lesion to esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Nearly 10% of patients with reflux esophagitis may have some adenomatous metaplasia.
On double-contrast fluoroscopy, Barrett's esophagus demonstrates a reticular (web-like)
mucosal pattern, often with a segmental stricture in the mid-esophagus.
Barrett's esophagus is often associated with esophageal stricture, which is abnormally high
in location compared to a peptic stricture.
Infectious esophagitis
Although radiographic distinction
between types of infections has
been described, endoscopy and
biopsy are typically performed in
Candida esophagitis: Spot
clinical practice to differentiate.
image from double-contrast
Esophageal candidiasis can present
esophagram shows a diffuse,
as a spectrum from scattered
shaggy appearance to the
entire visualized esophagus,
plaque-like lesions in mild disease to
consistent with severe
very shaggy-appearing esophagus in
candida esophagitis.
severe cases.
Case courtesy of Cheryl
Herpes esophagitis typically
Sadow, MD, Brigham and
causes small, discrete ulcerations
Women's Hospital.
scattered randomly throughout the
esophagus.
CMV/HIV esophagitis
characteristically causes a large, flat,
ovoid ulcer.
GI: 175