Ring enhancement (intra-axial)
Patient 1: Axial post-contrast T1-weighted Patient 2: Axial post-contrast T1-weighted Patient 3: Axial post-contrast T1-weighted
MRI shows a bilobed ring-enhancing
MRI shows an irregular ring-enhancing MRI shows a ring-enhancing lesion in the
lesion in the right frontal cortex. This was lesion effacing the atrium of the left
left parietal lobe abutting the falx. This
due to neurocysticercosis.
ventricle and extending across the
was a breast cancer metastasis.
splenium of the corpus callosum (arrow).
This was a glioblastoma.
Peripheral (ring) enhancement is a common presentation with a broad range of differential
diagnoses. The two most common causes are high-grade neoplasm and cerebral abscess.
The mnemonic MAGIC DR (metastasis, abscess, glioma, infarct, contusion, demyelination,
and radiation) may be helpful to remember the wide range of etiologies for ring
enhancement, although it is usually possible to narrow the differential based on the pattern
of ring enhancement combined with additional MRI sequences and clinical history.
Metastasis: Hematogenous metastases are typically found at the subcortical gray-white
junction. Metastases are often multiple, but smaller lesions may not be ring-enhancing.
Abscess: A pyogenic abscess is formed as a result of organization and sequestration of an
infection, featuring a central region of viscous necrosis.
The key imaging findings of abscess are reduced diffusivity (bright on DWI and dark on ADC) caused by
high viscosity of central necrosis and a characteristic smooth, hypointense rim on T2-weighted images.
Glioma: High grade tumors such as glioblastoma typically have a thick and irregular wall.
Multivoxel MRI spectroscopy will be abnormal outside the margin of an enhancing high grade glial
neoplasm secondary to nonenhancing infiltrative tumor. This is in contrast to demyelinating lesion,
abscess, and metastasis, where the spectral pattern returns to normal at the margin of the lesion.
Perfusion MRI demonstrates elevated perfusion in a high grade glioma.
Infarct: Although subacute infarcts often demonstrate gyral enhancement, ring
enhancement can be seen in subacute basal ganglia infarcts.
In contrast to neoplasm or infection, a subacute infarct does not have significant mass effect.
Contusion: Both traumatic and nontraumatic intraparenchyma. hemorrhage can show ring
enhancement in the subacute to chronic stage.
Demyelinating disease: The key finding in ring-enhancing demyelinating disease is lack of
significant mass effect. The "ring" of enhancement is often incomplete and "C" shaped.
Multiple sclerosis is the most common demyelinating disease. Enhancement suggests active disease.
Although the typical finding is an incomplete rim of enhancement, tumefactive demyelinating disease can
look identical to a high-grade tumor.
Radiation necrosis may look identical to a necrotic tumor such as high-grade tumor or
metastasis. On perfusion, cerebral blood volume is generally low in radiation necrosis and
typically increased in a high-grade glioma.
Neuro Brain: 663