BALLOON ANGIOPLASTY
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA)
Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is the first-line technique for treatment of a
stenosis, where a balloon is inflated across the stenosis to create a controlled stretch injury
and increase the luminal cross-sectional area.
When treating a stenosis caused by atherosclerotic plaque, angioplasty widens the luminal
diameter due to disruption of the intima and extension of the plaque into the media.
Most balloons are non-compliant. That is, they have a fixed diameter that does not further
expand with increased applied pressure, though it will burst above a maximum rated
pressure. They expand to open a blockage or stricture (seen as a "waist" in the balloon) or
dilate the vasculature.
Cutting balloons are non-compliant balloons with microsurgical blades to break through a
tight stricture.
In general, a balloon should be selected that is 10-20% larger than the vessel diameter.
Compliant balloons are inflated by volume, rather than pressure. They are used to fully
conform to the vascular contour or occlude the vessel, commonly used for fully expanding/
molding a stent-graft against a vessel wall.
Balloons are sized by diameter in millimeters and length in centimeters. For instance, a 10 X
6 balloon is 10 mm in diameter and 6 cm in length.
Risks of angioplasty include distal emboli, vessel rupture, and dissection. Anticoagulation
(typically heparin) should usually be used with angioplasty.
STENTS
Self-expandable versus balloon-expandable
The two broad categories of stents are. balloon-expandable and self-expandable stents.
In general, alloon-expandable stents have a higher radial force upon deployment but will
stay deformed if crushed. Thus, Dalloon-expandable stents are suboptimal for sites prone to
external compression, such as around joints or the adductor canal in the leg.
Self-expandable stents are more flexible and trackable through vessels than balloon-
expandable stents. Their use is favored when the route to the lesion is tortuous or when the
anatomy is prone to external compression.
Covered or uncovered
Most stents are bare metal stents and provide only a scaffolding-like support that allows
blood to still flow through the interstices; however, covered stents (e.g., stent grafts)
are impervious to fluid and create a new conduit, commonly employed for treatment of
aneurysms, pseudoaneurysms, ruptures, dissections, and TIPS.
Because stents are prone to in-stent stenosis, drug-eluting stents were developed to deliver
antiproliferative agents into the arterial wall.
In general, a stent should be selected that is 1-2 cm longer than the stenosis, with a
diameter that is 1-2 mm wider than the non-stenosed vessel lumen. A rule of thumb is 10%
oversizing of an arterial stent and 20% oversizing of a venous stent.
IR: 594