INTRATEMPORAL FACIAL NERVE
Anatomy of the intratemporal facial nerve
The portion of the facial nerve within the temporal bone is divided into three segments:
Labyrinthine segment: courses from the internal auditory canal to the geniculate ganglion (anterior
genu), which is located superior to the cochlea.- Greater superficial petrosal nerve innervates salivation.
Tympanic (horizontal) segment: courses posteriorly under the lateral semicircular canal to the posterior
genu.
Mastoid (descending) segment: courses inferiorly to the stylomastoid foramen.- Nerve to stapedius.- Chorda tympani (taste to anterior 2/3 of tongue).
The portions of facial nerve that may normally enhance (related to its peri/epineural
vascular plexus) on MRI are the geniculate ganglion, tympanic segment, and mastoid
segment.
Enhancement proximal to the geniculate ganglion, such as in the labyrinthine segment, or
extracranial portion is abnormal.
Facial nerve schwannoma
cochlea
vestibule
Facial nerve schwannoma: Axial CT through the temporal bone in a child shows subtle enlargement of the
tympanic segment of the left facial nerve canal (arrows).
Case courtesy Sanjay Prabhu, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Within the temporal bone, schwannomas of the facial nerve (CN VII) tend to be slow
growing and most commonly involve the geniculate ganglion, followed by the labyrinthine
and tympanic segments.
The majority of patients with facial nerve schwannoma present with facial nerve
palsy; however, up to 30% present without facial nerve symptoms. Larger facial nerve
schwannomas can interfere with ossicular function, causing conductive hearing loss.
On CT, the typical finding of a facial nerve schwannoma is enlargement of the bony
canal through which the involved portion of the facial nerve passes. There is typically no
calcification. The tumor usually demonstrates brisk contrast enhancement on MRI.
Facial nerve venous malformation
Facial nerve venous malformations, previously described as hemangiomas, are perineural
vascular lesions involving the petrous temporal bone.
Facial nerve venous malformation is most commonly seen in the region of the geniculate
ganglion, followed by the IAC, and least commonly at the posterior genu.
This lesion characteristically has an expansile honeycomb appearance with intralesional
bone spicules on CT, a pattern previously termed ossifying hemangioma. On MR, the
lesion is characterized by heterogeneous signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging and avid
enhancement.
Neuro Head & Neck: 819