Splenic metastasis (continued)
Splenic metastases may be solitary or multiple, cystic or solid. However, metastases to the
spleen are rare, occurring in 2-9% of cancer patients. Most patients with splenic metastases
already have confirmed widespread disease.
Isolated splenic metastases are seen in only 5% of patients with metastatic involvement of the spleen.
Theories for the low rate of splenic metastases include the antineoplastic properties of
ymphoid-rich splenic tissue and lack of afferent ymphatics available to bring tumor cells
into the spleen.
The most common primary tumors known to metastasize to the spleen include breast, lung,
ovarian, and melanoma. Ovarian cancer and melanoma typically cause cystic metastasis.
Calcification is rare unless the primary is a mucinous adenocarcinoma.
Angiosarcoma
Angiosarcoma is a rare, extremely aggressive malignancy, with a 20% 6-month survival.
Unlike hepatic angiosarcoma, the associations with Thorotrast, vinyl chloride, and arsenic
have not been well-established.
Angiosarcoma usually presents as a large, heterogeneous mass that may completely replace
the normal spleen. Enhancement is variable and heterogeneous.
MISCELLANEOUS SPLENIC LESIONS
Splenic infarct
Splenic infarcts are most commonly
due to emboli (in older patients) and
thrombosis (in younger patients with
hematologic disease).
Splenic infarct classically manifests
as a wedge-shaped peripheral region
of nonenhancement, but a more
heterogeneous, mass-like appearance
can also be seen.
On MR, the affected regions may
be T1 hyperintense if acute and
hemorrhagic, while chronic infarcts are
T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense.
Lack of enhancement of the entire
Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows a posterior peripheral
wedge-shaped region of splenic non-enhancement (arrows),
spleen should raise the concern for
consistent with infarct.
complete infarction, possibly due to a
wandering spleen with torsion.
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's
Hospital.
Gamna-Gandy bodies
Gamna-Gandy bodies are multiple tiny foci of hemosiderin deposition and are a sequela of
portal hypertension.
Other signs of portal hypertension and cirrhosis are usually apparent on imaging, such as
splenomegaly, varices, recanalized umbilical vein, ascites, and a nodular liver contour.
The hemosiderin deposits demonstrate low signal on all sequences. On in- and out-of-phase
gradient-echo sequences, the longer TE of the in-phase images demonstrates blooming
(relatively decreased signal on in-phase images), due to longer dephasing time and
exaggeration of T2* effect.
GI: 169