Extension teardrop fracture
Extension teardrop fracture:
Sagittal CT demonstrates a minimally displaced
fracture of the anterior/inferior corner of C2
(arrow).
In contrast to a flexion teardrop fracture, there is
no retropulsion of the vertebral body.
In contrast to a flexion teardrop fracture, an extension teardrop fracture is a stable fracture
that usually occurs higher in the cervical spine, at C2 or C3.
On the lateral radiograph, an anterior/inferior avulsion fragment is seen, similar to flexion
teardrop. Unlike a flexion teardrop fracture, there is no subluxation and the spinolaminar
line is not disrupted. The extension teardrop fracture fragment is typically taller in
craniocaudal dimension compared to its anterior-posterior dimension.
The typical mechanism of an extension teardrop fracture is hyperextension, with fracture
resulting from avulsion of the endplate by the anterior longitudinal ligament.
Clay-shoveler's fracture
A clay-shoveler's fracture is a displaced avulsion fracture of a spinous process. It is caused by
forced flexion.- Clay-shoveler's fracture occurs in the lower cervical/upper thoracic spine, from C6-T1.
Bilateral interfacetal dislocation (locked facets)
Bilateral interfacetal dislocation, also called bilateral locked facets, is a hyperflexion injury
caused by complete disruption of all spinal ligaments and resultant anterior dislocation of
the affected vertebra by >50%.
Bilateral interfacetal dislocation is unstable with a high risk of cord damage.
It typically occurs in the lower cervical spine.
The naked facet sign is seen when the superior articular facets are not covered by the
adjacent inferior articular facets.
Perched facets are a less severe variation of locked facets. The inferior articular facets of the
superior vertebral body are subluxated (but not displaced) and perched upon the superior
articular process of the inferior vertebra. Perched facets feature anterior subluxation of >3
mm but less than the 50% seen in a complete dislocation.
Unilateral interfacetal dislocation
Unilateral interfacetal dislocation is dislocation of a single facet joint, caused by hyperflexion
with rotation opposite the site of the dislocation.
Unilateral interfacetal dislocation is considered a stable fracture.
Grisel syndrome
Grisel syndrome is nontraumatic rotatory subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint (C1-C2)
secondary to an inflammatory mass, most commonly occurring as a sequela of pharyngitis
or retropharyngeal abscess.
Spine: 902