BI-RADS LEXICON FOR ULTRASOUND MASSES
Use of the BI-RADS lexicon allows one to stratify sonographic masses on a spectrum from
benign to malignant based solely on the report wording.
Size and position
A mass should be measured in all three orthogonal planes, with position labeled in terms of
clockface and distance from the nipple.
Shape
The BI-RADS lexicon for the shape of an ultrasound mass includes round, oval, and irregular,
the same as for a mammographic mass.
Orientation
The orientation of the long axis of a mass (relative to the skin) is unique to ultrasound.
A mass that is parallel in orientation is more likely to be benign.
In contrast, a non-parallel mass (known informally as taller-than-wide? is oriented with
the long axis vertical and is suspicious for malignancy. This finding is based on the propensity
of a malignant process to violate tissue planes.
Margin
Similar to mammography, benign masses are typically circumscribed.
If the margins of a mass are not circumscribed, they can be characterized as indistinct,
angular, microlobulated, or spiculated.
Indistinct: No clear boundary between the mass and its surrounding tissue.
Angular: Featuring sharp corners.
Microlobulated: Serrated appearance of the margins.
Spiculated: Linear projections emanating from the mass.
Note that obscured is not a BI-RADs descriptor for ultrasound, only for mammography.
Echo pattern
The echo pattern describes the internal texture of an ultrasound lesion. Most benign
and malignant lesions are hypoechoic. The margins of a lesion are more reliable than the
echogenicity in determining if a lesion has benign features.
An anechoic structure has no internal echoes and most commonly (but not always)
represents a simple cyst.
Al hypoechoic structure is defined as decreased echogenicity in comparison to the
surrounding mammary fat.
An isoechoic structure has the same echogenicity as surrounding fat. An isoechoic lesion can
be challenging to visualize.
Al hyperechoic structure is more echogenic than fat. It may be either equal or greater in
echogenicity compared to fibroglandular tissue.
A complex cystic and solid echo pattern describes a lesion that is partially cystic (containing
anechoic elements) and partially solid (containing elements of varying echogenicity).
Al heterogeneous echo pattern represents a combination of internal echogenicities.
Posterior features
The posterior features of a lesion describe the attenuation characteristics of the sound beam
deep to the lesion.
Breast: 400