Pattern of bone destruction: Margin analysis
Analysis of a bone lesion's margins (i.e., zone of transition from normal to abnormal
bone) helps to characterize the bony destruction and stratify a lesion as aggressive or non
aggressive.
A: sharply marginated zone of transition usually denotes a less aggressive lesion with slower
rate of growth. The faster the rate of growth, the more aggressive the lesion may be. A wide
zone of transition suggests rapid growth and a more aggressive lesion.
The Lodwick classification of bone destruction helps to stratify aggressiveness:
Type 1: Geographic pattern: Margins have a thin zone of transition and may be sclerotic or
well-defined.
1A: Thin: sclerotic margins. Almost always nonaggressive.
1B: Well-defined margins. Usually nonaggressive.
1C: Any part of the margin is indistinct.
Type 2: Moth-eaten pattern: It is difficult to define any border at all. Aggressive.
Type 3: Permeative: The permeative pattern is characterized by multiple tiny holes that
infiltrate the bone. This pattern is very aggressive and is seen in lymphoma, leukemia, and
Ewing sarcoma.
A pseudopermeative process describes the appearance of osteoporosis and osseous
hemangioma, two benign conditions. Unlike the true permeative appearance of an
aggressive lesion, the pseudopermeative appearance seen in these two entities will extend
to the cortex.
New matrix created by tumor
Matrix produced by an osteoid lesion, such as malignant osteosarcoma, appears as fluffy,
cloud-like bone.
Matrix produced by a chondroid lesion, such as a benign enchondroma or malignant
chondrosarcoma, has a ring and arc or popcorn-like appearance.
A ground glass matrix describes blurring of the trabeculae and is seen in fibrous dysplasia, a
benign fibrosseous lesion involving abnormal proliferation of intraosseous fibroblasts.
Unique features
The fallen-fragment sign is seen in a simple (unicameral) bone cyst with pathologic fracture.
An aneurysmal or expansile appearance suggests an aneurysmal bone cyst.
Resorption of distal clavicles or tumoral calcinosis can suggest yperparathyoidism, which
can cause brown tumors.
PATIENT AGE
The two most likely considerations of an aggressive lytic bone lesion in a patient over age 40
are metastasis or myeloma.
Under age 20, an aggressive lytic lesion is most likely to represent eosinophilic granuloma,
infection, or Ewing sarcoma.
LOCATION WITHIN BONE
Eccentric within bone
Giant-cell tumor, chondroblastoma, aneurysmal bone cyst, non-ossifying fibroma, and the
rare chondromyxoid fibroma are located eccentrically within the bone.
Central (in the middle of a long bone)
Simple bone cyst, enchondroma, and fibrous dysplasia are located centrally within the bone.
MSK: 936