EXTRADURAL LESIONS
Overview of extradural lesions
Extradural lesions are located external to the
sagittal schematic axial schematic
dura, including the vertebra and epidural space.
Degenerative lesions, such as osteophytes
and herniated discs, are the most common
extradural lesions.
Other important extradural lesions include
neoplasms and infection discis/osteomyeits.
The most common extradural neoplasms that
cause epidural spinal cord compression are
carcinoma metastases, plasmac/oma/multple
myeloma, and lymphomas.
Primary extradural tumors are rare.
EXTRADURAL SPINAL/VERTEBRAL NEOPLASMS
Extradural metastasis
Metastatic disease is the most common extradural malignancy in adults. Metastases usually
involve the vertebra and extend into the epidural space rather than being purely epidural.
Breast, lung, and prostate are the most common primary tumors to metastasize to the spinal
column.
T1-weighted images are essential for evaluation of vertebral body marrow replacement.
Marrow should always be more hyperintense on T1-weighted images than the intervertebral
discs.
Focal decrease in intensity on T1-weighted images is concerning for metastasis.
Diffuse decrease in intensity on T1-weighted images is abnormal but nonspecific. The
differential for diffusely decreased T1 marrow signal includes leukemia, lymphoma,
myelofibrosis, HIV, and idiopathic causes.
Primary extradural tumors in middle-aged and older adults
Spinal lymphoma most commonly involves the vertebra or epidural space. Secondary spinal
involvement is more common than primary bone lymphoma, usually in the form of non-
Hodgkin lymphomas like diffuse large B-cell ymphoma. Lesions are more often osteolytic
than sclerotic.
Solitary plasmacytoma of bone is a lytic, expansile bony lesion of late adulthood that
is a precursor of multiple myeloma (which features marrow involvement and end-organ
damage). Soft tissue lesions are called solitary extramedullary plasmacytomas.
The presence of multiple lesions implies the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Development of multiple
myeloma, or even abnormal serum/urine protein electrophoresis, may not occur for many years after
diagnosis of a plasmacytoma.
Chordoma is a malignant tumor of older adults that arises from a notochord remnant.
Chordoma occurs most commonly in the sacrococcygeal region and second most commonly
in the clivus. Up to 15% may occur in the vertebral bodies (most commonly cervical).
Chordoma appears as a destructive, hyperintense mass on T2-weighted images. It avidly enhances.
Chondrosarcoma is a low-grade malignancy that appears as a hyperintense mass on T2-
weighted images, similar to chordoma. Chondroid rings-and-arcs calcification may be seen.
Spine: 879