Amyloid arthropathy
Amyloid arthropathy is a rare noninflammatory arthropathy due to infiltration of bones,
joints and soft-tissues by beta-pleated sheets of amino acids. Primary systemic amyloidosis
is associated with monoclonal plasma cell dyscrasia. Secondary amyloidosis is associated
with chronic underlying inflammation or infection. Another form of amyloidosis is caused by
B,-microglobulin accumulation in patients on chronic hemodialysis.
A characteristic clinical finding of amyloidosis is bulky soft-tissue nodules in the shoulder
superimposed upon atrophic shoulder muscles, producing the shoulder-pad sign.
Imaging findings of amyloid arthropathy are nonspecific but may resemble RA. Intra-
articular deposits cause articular cartilage destruction. Soft-tissue nodules and erosions may
be present.
Ochronosis (alkaptonuria)
Lateral radiograph of the thoracic spine demonstrates
calcification of thei intervertebral disc at each level
(arrows), with mild diffuse disc height loss.
Ochronosis is the connective tissue manifestation of alkaptonuria. Alkaptonuria is caused by
a defect in homogentisic acid oxidase, causing homogentisic acid polymers to accumulate in
the visceral organs, intervertebral discs, and joints. Clinically, homogentisic acid in the urine
turns black when exposed to air.
A specific finding of ochronosis is intervertebral disc calcifications at every level with
accompanying disc space narrowing.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a multisystemic granulomatous disease. Lung findings, including adenopathy
and parenchymal disease, are present in the majority of patients and are the primary
manifestation of disease.
Bony manifestations of sarcoid are rare. A characteristic finding in the hands is lace-like lytic
lesions in the middle or distal phalanges.
Sarcoidosis may also manifest as acute or chronic polyarthritis, although there are no
distinctive radiographic patterns. Ankle involvement, especially if bilateral or associated with
erythema nodosum, should raise suspicion of sarcoidosis and prompt a chest radiograph.
MSK: 930