PLAIN FILM IMAGING OF HEART DISEASE
By applying a systematic approach, the standard chest radiograph can offer valuable
information about the presence or severity of heart disease.
The radiographic evaluation of heart disease begins with an assessment of the size of
the cardiac silhouette. Radiographically evident heart disease can be divided into two
categories: Those with a normal-sized cardiac silhouette and those with an enlarged cardiac
silhouette.
A ratio of the cardiac silhouette to the inner diameter of the thorax (the cardiothoracic ratio)
of 0.55 or greater (on a PA projection) suggests enlargement of the cardiac silhouette.
Cardiovascular diseases with an enlarged cardiac silhouette include cardiomyopathy
secondary to congestive heart failure, valvular regurgitation (aortic, mitral, or tricuspid
regurgitation), high-output or volume overload states, dilated cardiomyopathy, pericardial
effusion, and paracardiac mass.
To distinguish between the various causes of enlarged cardiac silhouette, the key structures
to evaluate are the left atrium and the aorta.
If the left atrium is enlarged and the cardiac silhouette is enlarged, that suggests mitral regurgitation.
Ifthe aortai is enlarged and the cardiac silhouette is enlarged, that suggests aortic regurgitation.
If neither the left atrium nor the aorta is enlarged, that suggests one of the other etiologies.
Cardiovascular diseases with a normal-sized cardiac silhouette include valvular stenosis
(aortic or mitral stenosis), pulmonary artery hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
restrictive physiology, and acute myocardial infarction.
Similar to evaluation of diseases with an enlarged cardiac silhouette, the key structures to
evaluate in the presence of a normal cardiac silhouette are the left atrium and the aorta.
Ifthe left atrium is enlarged and the cardiac silhouette is normal, that suggests mitral stenosis.
Ift the aortai is enlarged and the cardiac silhouette is normal, that suggests aortic stenosis or aortic
aneurysm.
If neither the left atrium nor the aorta is enlarged, that suggests one of the other etiologies.
Other structures to always evaluate include the pulmonary vascularity, thoracic wall,
chamber enlargement, and the great vessels (pulmonary arteries, ascending aorta, aortic
arch, and descending aorta).
Right ventricular enlargement
The right ventricle is the most anterior cardiac chamber. Right ventricular enlargement
causes displacement of the cardiac apex in a leftward direction (in contrast to left ventricular
enlargement, which causes displacement in a left-inferior direction).
Right ventricular enlargement may cause opacification of the retrosternal clear space on the
lateral radiograph.
Right atrial enlargement
The right atrium forms the right heart border. Right atrial enlargement causes lateral bulging
or elongation of the right heart border.
Left ventricular enlargement
The left ventricle forms the left heart border. Left ventricular enlargement typically causes
displacement of the cardiac apex in a left-inferior direction.
Note that hypertrophic cardiomyopathy does not cause enlargement of the external contour
of the ventricle.
Cardiac: 501