ACE inhibitor renogram (continued)
After administration of an ACE inhibitor (typically captopril, 25-50 mg), the efferent
arterioles will relax and GFR will decrease.
If a patient is already on an ACE inhibitor, it should be stopped for 48 hours to 1 week prior to the exam.
Intravenous access should be maintained in case fluid resuscitation is needed to treat hypotension.
Known severe renal artery stenosis is a relative contraindication as ACE inhibitor-induced intrarenal
hypotension can lead to acute renal failure.
An ACE renogram can be performed in one or two days.
A single-day, two-stage protocol comprises a baseline non-captopril study using a low dose of MAG3,
followed by a captopril study several hours later when residual activity from the first study has cleared the
kidneys and urinary tract.
A two-day protocol is usually used for patients without pre-existing renal dysfunction. The captopril study
is performed first, which if normal, excludes renovascular hypertension and thus eliminates the need for a
baseline study. If the captopril study is abnormal, al baseline study is performed on the following day.
A positive study depends on the radiotracer utilized (MAG3 or DTPA), but the hallmark is a
post-ACE inhibitor renogram that becomes abnormal or more abnormal, usually unilaterally.
MAG3 pre-captopril
post-captopril
DTPA
pre-captopril
post-captopril
MAG3 (tubular agent): Uptake and secretion are generally preserved even with a reduced GFR, but further
1 GFR results in 1 urine production and 1 washout of secreted agent from collecting system.
Positive criteria for MAG3 study include: <40% uptake by one kidney at 2-3 minutes; difference in cortical
activity by 20%; or delay in time to peak activity of more than 2 minutes (compared to pre-ACE inhibitor).
DTPA (glomerular agent): Unlike MAG3, 1 GFR causes diminished uptake and excretion of DTPA.
Bilateral worsening renograms can be caused by hypotension, dehydration (most common),
urinary obstruction, medical renal disease, or bilateral renal artery stenosis.
Renal cortical imaging
Renal cortical imaging is limited to renal imaging in children to evaluate for pyelonephritis or
scarring. The radiotracer is Tc-99m DMSA.
A normal DMSA study excludes the diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis.
A positive study for pyelonephritis can have three patterns:
Focal cortical defect.
Multifocal cortical defects.
Diffusely decreased radiotracer.
Nucs: 479