Paragangliomas
Paragangliomas are the most common primary middle ear tumors. Clinically, they typically
present with pulsatile tinnitus or conductive hearing loss and appear on otoscopic
evaluation as a red retrotympanic mass.
Paragangliomas are extra-adrenal neoplasms of sympathetic or parasympathetic
paraganglionic tissue. In the head and neck, most arise from the parasympathetic,
noncatecholaminergic glomus cells and therefore are called glomus tumors. Most are
benign, but they can be locally aggressive. Less than 5% undergo malignant degeneration.
Most head and neck paragangliomas are sporadic but a significant minority are associated
with a hereditary disorder: familial paraganglioma due to succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)
subunit gene mutations, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1), or von Hippel Lindau disease (VHL).
Paragangliomas tend to occur in a few locations in the head and neck: at the carotid
bifurcation, in the suprahyoid neck along the course of the vagus nerve, at the jugular
foramen, and in the middle ear.
Glomus tympanicum tumor is a paraganglioma isolated to the middle ear, typically centered at the
cochlear promontory along the Jacobson nerve (branch of CN IX). The jugular plate is preserved.
Glomus jugulotympanicum tumor describes a paraganglioma that involves both the middle ear cavity
and jugular foramen, eroding through the jugular plate.
Paragangliomas are highly vascular, avidly enhancing soft tissue masses. In larger tumors,
the classic MRI pattern is the salt and pepper appearance due to intratumoral flow voids.
Preoperative angiography with tumor embolization can reduce surgical blood loss.
Glomus tympanicum: Coronal (left image) and axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrates a
heterogeneously enhancing lesion (yellow arrows) with apparent flow voids (red arrows) within the left
middle ear.
As paragangliomas are neuroendocrine tumors that express somatostatin receptor 2
(SSTR2), the most sensitive modality for their detection is Ga-68 DOTATATE PET-CT.
Neuro Head & Neck: 815