HIDA protocol (continued)
Dynamic imaging of the right upper quadrant begins immediately after injection of 5 mCi Tc-
99m IDA. As soon as the gallbladder is visualized, acute cholecystitis is ruled out.
If the gallbladder is not visualized by one hour, morphine is given (0.04 mg/kg, up to a
maximum dose of 4 mg) and imaging continues for 30 more minutes. Morphine contracts
the sphincter of Oddi, redirecting bile into the cystic duct.
Morphine should only be given if traceri is visualized in the small bowel, otherwise there is the theoretical
risk of worsening a potential common bile duct obstruction. However, nonvisualization of tracer in the
small bowel is not specific for common bile duct obstruction.
If the patient has a morphine allergy, an alternative is to image for a total of 4 hours.
Normal HIDA scan
In a normal HIDA scan, the liver is visible
Single image
by 5 minutes.
from a HIDA
scan 15 minutes
The gallbladder is typically seen by 15
after 4.1 mCi Tc-
minutes due to radiotracer flow into the
99m disofenin
cystic duct.
administered shows
normal visualization
Tracer should be seen in the small bowel
of the liver,
to ensure a patent common bile duct.
gallbladder (arrow),
Small amount of bile reflux into the
and small bowel.
stomach can be a normal finding.
Acute cholecystitis
Almost all patients with acute cholecystitis have cystic duct obstruction.
Nonvisualization of the gallbladder after 90 minutes of imaging and morphine augmentation
is approximately 86-98% sensitive for the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis, with a false-
positive rate of approximately 6%, most commonly due to pancreatitis and biliary stasis.
The rim sign describes increased hepatic activity surrounding the gallbladder fossa, thought
to be due to hyperemia and is an ancillary finding of acute cholecystitis.
The cystic duct sign describes a small focus of activity in the cystic duct just proximal to the
site of obstruction.
5 min
15 min
25 min
35 min
45 min
55 min
Acute cholecystitis: Sequential images from al HIDA: scan with 3.87 mCi Tc-99m disofenin administered shows
prompt visualization of the liver. The small bowel is visualized by 25 minutes. There is no visualization of the
gallbladder during the course of the exam. The patient had a morphine allergy sO 4-hour delayed images were
obtained instead (not shown), which also do not demonstrate the gallbladder.
Nucs: 466