PERIPHERAL VASCULAR DISEASE
Femoropopliteal disease
Similar to aortoiliac disease, the second TransAtlantic Inter-Society (TASC-II) consensus
classifies emoropopliteal lesions and gives associated recommendations for intervention.
Type A: Single stenosis <10 cm: Endovascular treatment is the treatment of choice.
Type B: Multiple lesions (stenosis or occlusion), each <5 cm; single lesion <15 cm: Endovascular treatment
is preferred, depending on patient comorbidities and preference.
Type C: Multiple stenoses or occlusions >15 cm: Surgery is preferred, depending on patient comorbidities
and preference.
Type D: Chronic total occlusion: Surgery is treatment of choice.
Acute thromboembolic disease
Acute limb ischemia is an emergency and is often associated with pain, pallor,
poikilothermia (coldness), pulselessness, and paresthesias. Blue toe syndrome is acute
thromboembolism in the toes. The characteristic imaging feature in the upper extremities is
occlusion of distal small arteries of the hand.
Thromboembolic disease of the upper extremities is most commonly caused by cardiac emboli (of which
atrial fibrillation is a common cause). Less commonly, a subclavian artery aneurysm may be the source of
the thrombus.
Ifthe source of emboli is central (such as the heart), bilateral disease would be expected, while a unilateral
lesion would show unilateral emboli.
Angiography shows an acute cutoff of the affected vessel, often with a meniscus sign.
Significant atherosclerotic disease may be absent.
Treatment options include surgical embolectomy, surgical bypass graft, and endovascular
thrombolysis. When attempting to treat endovascularly, a hydrophilic wire is used to cross
the lesion. A multi-sidehole infusion catheter is placed across the thrombus and tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA) is infused at 0.5 mg/hr for 48-72 hours.
While receiving intra-arterial tPA, the patient must be cared for in the ICU, with regular
monitoring of hematocrit and fibrinogen. TPA infusion should be slowed if the fibrinogen
decreases to <150 mg/dL and stopped if it reaches <100 mg/dL.
IR: 619