METABOLIC BONE DISEASE
MULTIFACTORIAL BONE DISEASE
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis (low bone mass) is the most common metabolic bone disease, contributing
to millions of fractures per year. Osteoporosis may be secondary to numerous nutritional,
endocrine, and other etiologies.
Vitamin or nutritional deficiencies can cause osteoporosis, including:
Osteomalacia (Looser zone).
Alcoholism.
Hypophosphatemia.
Scurvy (Wimberger sign).
Endocrine disturbances can impact calcium metabolism, causing osteoporosis, including:
yperparathyroidism (subperiosteal resorption).
Cushing disease or any increase in endogenous/exogenous steroids.
Diffuse malignancy, such as myelomatosis, can cause diffuse bony demineralization.
Genetic causes of osteoporosis include:
Osteogenesis imperfecta.
Gaucher disease.
Anemia, including sickle cell and thalassemia.
Focal osteopenia has a more limited list of causes, including:
Immobility/disuse.
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
Transient regional osteoporosis of the hip.
DUAL ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY (DEXA)
Overview of dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry, universally called DEXA, is a method to quantify bone
mineral density. A DEXA scan images the lumbar spine (L1-L4), and the hip. The forearm can
also be imaged if either the hip or spine is not suitable (e.g., severe degenerative changes or
prior surgery), or if a third point of reference is desired.
The DEXA machine provides an absolute value of bone mineral density (most useful to track
changes over time), as well as a T-score and a Z-score.
The T-score is the number of standard deviations from healthy young sex-matched patients.
The Z-score is the number of standard deviations from age-matched and sex-matched patients.
In menopausal and post-menopausal females and males >50 years of age, there are
standard definitions for normal, osteoporosis, and osteopenia, based on the T-score.
Normal: T-score at or greater than -1.0.
Osteopenia (low bone mass): T-score between -1.0 and --2.5.
Osteoporosis: T-score at or less than -2.5.
For pre-menopausal females and males <age 50, the Z-score is used. A Z-score of -2.0 or
lower is "below expected range for age" and a Z-score above -2.0 is "within the expected
range for age."
MSK: 981