Adrenal hypofunction
Substantial destruction of adrenal tissue is required to produce adrenal insufficiency.
Though usually not an imaging diagnosis, Addison disease represents chronic adrenocortical
insufficiency. It can be caused by autoimmune destruction of the adrenal glands or by prior
infection.
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome is post-hemorrhagic adrenal failure secondary to
Neisseria meningitidis bacteremia.
Idiopathic adrenal hemorrhage is usually unilateral and rarely causes adrenal hypofunction.
IMAGING OF ADRENAL ADENOMA AND THE INDETERMINATE ADRENAL MASS
Adrenal adenoma
Adrenal adenoma is a benign tumor of the adrenal cortex. Adenomas are usually incidental,
but occasionally produce excess aldosterone that results in secondary hypertension (Conn
syndrome). The majority of adrenal adenomas have two properties that allow for diagnosis
by imaging: microscopic fat and/or rapid washout characteristics on contrast-enhanced CT.
An adrenal protocol CT (described below) is the best imaging study to evaluate for the
presence of an adrenal adenoma.
An adrenal nodule with attenuation <10 Hounsfield units (HU) on noncontrast CT can be reliably diagnosed
as adenoma; 70-80% of adenomas measure <10 HU on noncontrast CT.
If a nodule measures >10 HU on noncontrast CT, IV contrast is administered to assess washout
characteristics; 20-30% of adenomas measure >10 HU on noncontrast CT (lipid-poor adenoma).
An adrenal adenoma has an absolute washout >60% or a relative washout >40%.
If a nodule does not meet CT density or washout criteria for an adenoma, it is considered
indeterminate. In practice, an indeterminate adrenal nodule in a patient without known
malignancy most likely represents a lipid-poor adenoma and advanced imaging is usually not
required.
If diagnosis is required for further management (e.g., in a lung cancer patient without
known metastatic disease), further workup is based on lesion size, history of malignancy,
and availability of prior imaging. In some cases, FDG PET/CT and adrenal mass biopsy can be
helpful.
A collision tumor represents co-existence of two tumors within an adrenal mass, such as
metastasis within an adrenal adenoma or myelolipoma.
Collision tumor: There is a left adrenal mass. Opposed phase MRI (left image) shows a crescentic lesion
posterolaterally with signal drop-out (yellow arrows), in keeping with an adrenal adenoma. There is an
additional lesion located anteromedially (red arrows), which does not demonstrate: signal drop-out on opposed
phase imaging, and which shows central necrosis with enhancement on post-contrast imaging (right image).
If an "adenoma" appears heterogeneous or shows an interval increase in size, then a collision tumor
should be considered in patients with a known primary malignancy, even if a portion of the lesion
attenuates <10 HU.
GU: 234