Posterior features (continued)
Acoustic enhancement (also called posterior through-transmision) refers to a column of
increased echogenicity posterior (deep) to the mass. Posterior enhancement is one of the
characteristics of a simple cyst, although on its own posterior enhancement is not specific.
Shadowing is attenuation of the sound beam as it passes through the lesion. Shadowing is
associated with fibrosis, such as from a neoplastic desmoplastic reaction or surgical scar.
If a lesion has no posterior acoustic features, then the echogenicity of the area immediately
deep to the mass is the same as adjacent tissue.
Al lesion can also have a combined pattern of posterior acoustic features, such as a
fibroadenoma containing a large, coarse, shadowing calcification.
ULTRASOUND DIFFERENTIATION OF BENIGN AND MALIGNANT SOLID MASSES
Certain ultrasound features are associated with benign or malignant lesions. In some
circumstances, a solid mass that demonstrates only benign ultrasound findings may be
classified as BI-RADS 3 and followed.
Ultrasound features of a benign mass
Lack of any malignant findings: If even a single malignant feature is present then a lesion is
indeterminate or suspicious and should be biopsied.
Marked hyperechogenicity (relative to fat).
Circumscribed margins.
Parallel orientation to the skin wider-than-tall, width:height >1.4).
Oval shape.
Few gentle lobulations.
Thin echogenic pseudocapsule.
Ultrasound features of a malignant mass
Spiculated margins, which is the most specific sign of malignancy.
Non-parallel taller-than-wide) orientation, the second most specific sign.
Angular or microlobulated margins.
Posterior shadowing.
Markedly hypoechoic echotexture.
Indeterminate ultrasound features
The following features are not helpful in differentiating between benign or malignant
masses: Lesion size, iso- or mild hypoechogenicity, posterior acoustic enhancement, and
heterogeneous or homogeneous texture.
ULTRASOUND USE OF BI-RADS 3
It may be appropriate to place specific well-defined entities into the BI-RADS 3 (probably
benign) category, with literature supporting less than 2% risk of cancer.
Isolated complicated cyst containing low-level internal echoes, without solid component
Clustered microcysts (discussed later in the chapter).
Oval, hypoechoic, circumscribed, parallel mass, most likely a fibroadenoma.
Hyperechoic mass with central hypoechogenicity, most likely fat necrosis. Note that if an oil
cyst is seen at mammograpny this finding can be classified as benign.
Additional BI-RADS 3 cases for which robust data does not exist include isolated shadowing
without a mass, and architectural distortion thought to be due to a surgical scar.
Breast: 401