Psoriatic arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis (arthritis mutilans form):
PA radiograph of the hand demonstrates swelling of
the third digit (yellow arrows). There are pencil-in-
cup erosions of the DIP and PIP joints (red arrows).
Multiple joint subluxations produce telescoping of
the digits with a main-en-lorgnette (opera-glass
hand) deformity.
Case courtesy Barbara Weissman, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Psoriatic arthritis clinically presents as arthropathy in a patient with skin psoriasis. Psoriatic
arthritis most commonly affects the hands. In contrast to RA, mineralization is preserved.
Sacroiliitis, when present, is usually asymmetric.
There are several patterns of psoriatic arthritis, including oligoarthritis, polyarthritis,
spondyloarthropathy (producing bulky asymmetric bridging), and arthritis mutilans (a severe
form usually affecting the hands, less commonly the feet).
In the hands, the radiographic hallmark of psoriatic arthritis is diffuse soft-tissue swelling
of an entire digit, producing the sausage digit. Pencil-in-cup erosions are also characteristic,
most commonly affecting the DIPS. Although hand findings are usually bilateral, involvement
tends to be asymmetric. The severe arthritis mutilans variant can cause marked deformity
and telescoping digits, also known as the main-en-lorgnette (opera-glass hand) deformity.
Additional findings in the nands include fluffy periostitis and ill-defined erosions of the joint margins.
In the foot, the great toe interphalangeal and MTP joints are most commonly affected.
An ivory phalanx represents osteosclerosis and is relatively specific for psoriatic arthritis.
Psoriatic arthritis produces a plantar calcaneal spur with periosteal reaction. In contrast, a
degenerative calcaneal spur will not feature reactive new bone.
In the spine, psoriatic arthritis causes formation of coarse bony bridging (bulky lateral bony
outgrowths), sometimes indistinguishable from reactive arthropathy (discussed below).
Reactive arthropathy previously called Reiter disease)
Reactive arthropathy is an inflammatory arthritis thought to be a sequela of infectious
diarrhea, urethritis, or cervicitis. Sacroiliitis is usually asymmetric, as in psoriatic arthritis.
Reactive arthropathy predominantly affects the feet, where it has a similar appearance to
psoriatic arthritis. Initial radiographic findings include diffuse soft-tissue swelling, joint space
loss, aggressive marginal erosions, and juxta-articular osteopenia. Bony mineralization is
preserved in the later stage of disease.
In particular, the calcaneus is a common site of involvement with bony proliferative changes
including erosions, enthesophytes, and fluffy periosteal reaction. The posterior-superion
aspect of the calcaneus is a frequent site of erosion due to adjacent bursitis. There is often
secondary Achilles tendinitis and thickening of the soft-tissues.
In the hands, reactive arthropathy affects the interphalangeal joints and MTPS with erosions
and diaphyseal periostitis.
Reactive arthropathy may affect the spine with formation of coarse bony bridging, which
may be difficult to distinguish from psoriatic arthritis.
MSK: 920