Clinical applications of myocardial perfusion and viability imaging (continued)
Preoperative risk assessment for intermediate to high risk noncardiac surgery.
Evaluation of viability prior to coronary revascularization therapy.
Evaluation of myocardial revascularization status post CABG in symptomatic patients or
after 5 years.
RADIONUCLIDES
Thallium-201
Thallium-201 is a cyclotron-produced radionuclide with a half-life of 73 hours. It decays by
electron capture and emits characteristic X-rays of 69-81 kev.
Relatively low energy characteristic X-rays increase attenuation artifact from chest wall: soft tissues.
Iti is necessary to administer fairly low doses due to its long half-life, with resultant lower count densities
which requires longer imaging acquisition times.
Physiologically, thallium acts like a potassium analog, crossing into the cell via active
transport through the ATP-dependent sodium-potassium transmembrane pump.
Myocardial uptake is directly proportional to myocardial perfusion.
A! 50% stenosis will generally produce a perfusion defect upon maximal exercise.
Thallium undergoes redistribution with simultaneous cellular washout and re-extraction of
blood-pool radiotracer. Only viable myocardium can extract thallium. Therefore, ischemic
but viable myocardium will show perfusion defect during stress due to decreased blood
flow, but normalization of defect on post-redistribution images. In contrast, an infarct or scar
will show a persistent defect.
Technetium-99m sestamibi and tetrofosmin
Technetium-99m is generatorproduces, therefore more readily available. Its shorter half-
life (6 hours) and higher photon energy (140 keV) allow for larger administered dose at
lower radiation dose to the patient, superior image quality, shorter acquisition time, and
less attenuation artifact from adjacent soft tissues. For these reasons, Tc-99m labeled
radiotracers are more widely used than thallium in myocardial perfusion imaging.
Unlike thallium, Tc-99m sestamibi (Cardiolite) does not undergo redistribution and remains
fixed in the myocardium.
Sestamibi enters myocardium via passive diffusion and binds to mitochondrial membrane
proteins. Similar to thallium, myocardial uptake of sestamibi is proportional to myocardial
perfusion.
Tc-99m tetrofosmin (Myoview) is similar to sestamibi but has the advantage of faster
hepatobiliary clearance, which allows earlier imaging (since adjacent liver activity may
interfere with cardiac imaging).
Rubidium-82
Rubidium-82 is a positron-emitting PET perfusion agent that is generated from strontium-82.
A very short half-life of 76 seconds allows high doses to be administered, however such a
short half-life precludes the use of exercise stress. Pharmacologic stress is used instead.
Rubidium-82 acts as a potassium analog, similar to thallium.
Nitrogen-13 ammonia
Nitrogen-13 ammonia is a positron-emitting PET perfusion agent (like rubidium-82) that has
a half-life of 10 minutes. Unlike rubidium-82, N-13 is cyclotron-produced and the cyclotron
must be on-site due to its short half-life.
Cardiac: 488