Hangman's fracture
Hangman's fracture is traumatic spondylolysis of C2. It results from hyperextension and
distraction, causing bilateral fractures through the pedicles of C2.
The characteristic radiographic finding is disruption of the spinolaminar line.
Al hangman's fracture with >3 mm displacement of C2 on C3 is likely unstable.
Burst fracture
Al burst fracture is similar in mechanism (axial loading) and appearance to a Jefferson
fracture, but occurs lower in the cervical spine, at C2-C7.
Flexion teardrop fracture
Lateral radiograph
Sagittal STIR MRI
Post-operative radiograph
Flexion teardrop fracture: Presentation radiograph demonstrates an anterior teardrop fragment (yellow
arrow) and retropulsion of C5 into the spinal canal. MRI shows traumatic disc extrusion with caudal migration
(red arrow) and spinal stenosis. There is disruption of the posterior ligamentous complex with tear of the
ligamentum flavum (blue arrow) and interspinous ligament (green arrow). Note focal fluid signal in the cord at
the C7 level (white arrow), which is thought to most likely represent a syrinx. The patient was treated with
C5-C6 anterior decompression and fusion.
Flexion teardrop fracture is the most severe cervical spinal injury that is potentially
compatible with life. It is caused by a hyperflexion and compression injury and results in
posterior displacement of the affected vertebral body into the spinal canal.
The posterior ligamentous complex is often disrupted due to distraction from posterior
displacement of the vertebral body.
The key radiographic finding is an avulsed bony fragment from the anterior-inferior aspect of
the vertebral body, caused by anterior longitudinal ligament avulsion. There is retropulsion
of the affected vertebral body, which is often rotated and appears shorter in anterior-
posterior dimension than the adjacent vertebrae. The intact-appearing posterior vertebral
body can result in spinal cord injury due to posterior displacement.
Flexion teardrop fracture can cause anterior cord syndrome due to compression of the
pyramidal tracts and anterior spinothalamic tracts. This clinically presents as complete
paralysis and loss of pain and temperature sensation. The dorsal column usually remains
intact, preserving touch and vibration sense.
Spine: 901