INSTABILITY: ASSOCIATED LESIONS
The vast majority of the alphabet-soup instability lesions are located at the anterior-inferior
aspect of the glenohumeral joint and are associated with the anterior instability and/or
sequela of anterior dislocation.
Bankart lesion
The Bankart lesion is an injury of the anteroinferior labrum due to anterior glenohumeral
dislocation. Specifically, a Bankart is detachment of the anteroinferior labrum from the
glenoid, with stripping of the scapular periosteum.
The labrum may migrate superiorly and appear as a balled-up mass-like object, producing
the glenoid labrum ovoid mass (GLOM) sign. The differential diagnosis for a black intra-
articular mass on MRI includes:
GLOM sign (if a Bankart lesion is present inferiorly).
Dislocated biceps tendon.
Air bubble (if an MR arthrogram was performed).
An osseous Bankart (or "bony Bankart") is a fracture of the anterior-inferior glenoid rim,
which predisposes to recurrent dislocation due to glenoid insufhiciency.
Hill-Sachs
Hill-Sachs is an impaction fracture of the posterolateral humeral head caused by anterior
dislocation. The Hill-Sachs lesion can be diagnosed by scrolling through sequential axial
images: With standard 5 mm slices, the normal humeral head should appear round in
three consecutive slices starting superiorly. If a Hill-Sachs lesion is present, there will be a
posterolateral notch in the humeral head.
Subtle Hill-Sachs can also be detected as bone marrow edema in this location, without
fracture.
Anterior labro-ligamentous periosteal sleeve avulsion (ALPSA)
An anterior abro-igamentous periosteal sleeve avulsion (ALPSA) is a variant of the Bankart
lesion and also represents an anterior-inferior labral injury. In contrast to the Bankart lesion,
the scapular periosteum is intact with an ALPSA.
Similar to the GLOM sign discussed above, the avulsed anterior-inferior labrum is balled
up. However, since the labrum remains attached to the periosteum in an ALPSA lesion, the
labrum is displaced inferomedially relative to the glenoid (as opposed to superiorly with the
GLOM sign).
Perthes lesion
The Perthes lesion is an avulsion of the anterior-inferior labrum, where the labrum remains
attached to the scapular periosteum.
Because the labrum remains attached to periosteum and may remain in its anatomic
position, the Perthes lesion can be very difficult to visualize. MR arthrography with ABER
abduction-external rotation) positioning is often necessary for diagnosis.
Humeral avulsion of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (HAGL)
Humeral avulsion of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (HAGL) is avulsion of the humeral
attachment of the IGHL. This lesion occurs on the opposite (humeral) site of the IGHL
compared to the BankarvALPsAPertnes lesions.
HAGL is associated with subscapularis tendon tears.
Bony HAGL (BHAGL)
A BHAGL is a HAGL lesion with an additional bony avulsion of the anatomic neck of the
humerus, caused by avulsion of the IGHL.
MSK: 1059