CEREBRAL TRAUMA
EXTRA-AXIAL HEMORRHAGE
Acute extra-axial hemorrhage subarachnoid, epidural, or subdural in location) is
usually hyperattenuating when imaged by CT; however, blood must clot in order to be
hyperattenuating. Hyperacute unclotted blood (and clotted blood in a patient with severe
anemia) may be close to water attenuation on CT.
Left frontal epidural hematoma
Bilateral subdural hematomas
Left-sided intraparenchymal
(arrow).
(yellow arrows) and subarachnoid hematoma with intraventricular
hemorrhage (red arrows).
extension of hemorrhage.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)
Trauma is the most common cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), while aneurysm
rupture is the most common cause of non-traumatic SAH.
Traumatic SAH tends to occur contralateral to the side of direct impact, most often in the
superficial cerebral sulci.
Epidural hematoma
An arterial epidural hematoma is an extra-axial collection of blood external to the dura,
classically caused by fracture of the squamous portion of the temporal bone and resultant
tearing of the middle meningeal artery.
An arterial epidural hematoma has a lentiform shape and does not cross the cranial sutures,
where the dura is tightly adherent to the cranium.
The swirl sign describes mixed high and low attenuation blood within the hematoma and
suggests active bleeding. The low attenuation blood is hyperacute unclotted blood while the
high attenuation blood is already clotted.
Al large epidural hematoma is a surgical emergency due to mass effect and risk of herniation,
although small epidural hematomas can be conservatively managed with serial imaging.
Venous epidural hematomas are far less common than arterial epidurals and are due to
laceration of the dural sinuses. Common locations are anterior middle cranial fossa and
posterior fossa.
Anterior middle fossa epidural hematomas are nearly always venous, rarely expand, have a clinically
indolent course, and therefore do not require surgical intervention.
In contrast, posterior fossa venous epidural hematomas may require surgical evacuation due to associated
mass effect.
Neuro Brain: 701