Aortic coarctation (continued)
Aortic coarctation is associated with other cardiovascular anomalies, including bicuspid
aortic valve (most common, 75-80%), ventricular septal defect, cyanotic congenital cardiac
anomalies, mitral valve abnormalities (parachute mitral valve), and patent ductus arteriosus.
Aortic coarctation could also be one of the 4 components of Shone syndrome - a left-sided
obstructive congenital heart disease that involves: 1) Supravalvular mitral membrane, 2)
subvalvular aortic stenosis, 3) parachute mitral valve, 4) aortic coarctation.
Apseudcoarctation represents kinking or buckling of the aorta, similar in morphology to a
true coarctation; however, there is no pressure differential and thus no collaterals.
Subclavian steal syndrome
Subclavian steal syndrome is a proximal stenosis or occlusion of the subclavian artery, which
leads to retrograde flow from the vertebral artery into the subclavian artery distal to the
flow-limiting lesion.
Subclavian steal syndrome clinically presents with vertebrobasilar insufficiency or syncope
exacerbated by arm exercise. There may occasionally be direct signs of brachial artery
insufficiency, such as extremity coolness or even fingertip necrosis.
Subclavian steal is best diagnosed with angiography. The early arterial phase shows the
proximal subclavian flow-limiting lesion and the later arterial phase shows retrograde flow
from the vertebral artery into the subclavian. However, angiography is usually reserved for
endovascular treatment. CTA or MRA can easily detect subclavian artery stenosis.
Treatment options include surgical bypass or angioplasty of the flow-limiting lesion.
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA (SVC)
SVC obstruction
Acute obstruction of the SVC causes SVC syndrome, which clinically presents as facial and
upper extremity edema and cyanosis. Acute SVC syndrome is a vascular emergency.
In contrast to acute SVC syndrome, chronic occlusion or stenosis of the SVC may be
asymptomatic. If symptoms are present, facial edema that improves with standing is
characteristic.
The most common causes of SVC obstruction are compression by thoracic malignancy,
catheter-associated thrombosis, and mediastinal fibrosis after histoplasmosis exposure.
The classic imaging findings on MRV or CTV are occlusion of the SVC and based on the
location (above or below the azygos vein), collateral vessels form.
A classic cross-sectional abdominal imaging finding in SVC obstruction is increased
enhancement of hepatic segment IVa due to collateral opacification of the vein of Sappey.
The vein of Sappey drains the liver in the region of the falciform ligament and communicates with internal
thoracic veins, which act as collateral vessels in the setting of SVC occlusion.
Vascular: 553