PEDIATRIC MUSCULOSKELETAL
FRACTURES IN CHILDREN
Pediatric bones are more elastic than adult bones, and therefore tend to "bend" (i.e.,
buckle, greenstick and plastic fractures) rather than "break".
There is a general timeline for dating pediatric fractures: periosteal reaction in less than 1
week and complete healing around 12 weeks.
Exceptions include metaphyseal, skull and costochondral junction fractures which often heal without
periosteal reaction.
When the radiographic diagnosis is equivocal, repeat radiographs can be performed in 7-10 days, when
periosteal reaction is expected to be visible.
Physiology of the physis
The physis, commonly known as the growth plate, consists of 4 histological zones of
cartilage arranged in layers.
The zone closest to the metaphysis is the zone of provisional calcification, composed of
chondrocytes that undergo apoptosis after preparing the matrix for calcification. New
bone subsequently forms along the scaffolding formed by these chondrocytes, leading to
longitudinal growth.
Salter Harris classification
normal
epiphysis
physis (growth plate)
metaphysis
Typel I
Type II
Type III
Type IV
Type V
physeal injury only
fracturei through
fracture through
fracturei through
physis completely
may be radiographically metaphysis
epiphysis
metaphysis and
crushed
occult, or may show subtle
epiphysis
physeal widening
The unfused physis is the weakest part of the developing skeleton. An injury that can cause
a ligament sprain in an adult may result in physeal fracture in a child.
The Salter Harris (SH) system classifies physeal fractures based on involvement of physis and
adjacent epiphysis and metaphysis. In general, the higher the classification, the greater the
chance of growth disturbance.
Type : Injury limited to the physis.
SH li injuries are often radiographically occult if the epiphysis is not displaced. The physis may be
asymmetrically widened. In the absence of physeal widening, the diagnosis of a SH li injury can be
suggested based on soft tissue swelling around the physis. Comparison views may be helpful.
Examples: Slipped capital femoral epiphysis and gymnast's wrist (physeal widening caused by chronic
stress on the wrist, which may mimic rickets).
Peds: 1159