Celiac disease (continued)
Other complications of celiac disease include:
Intussusception, thought to be due to uncoordinated peristalsis, without a lead-point mass.
Pneumatosis intestinalis, thought to be due to dissection of intraluminal gas through the inflamed bowel
wall. Pneumatosis in the setting of celiac disease is not thought to reflect bowel ischemia.
Splenic atrophy.
Increased risk of venous thromboembolism.
Lab abnormalities include anemia (secondary to malabsorption), leukopenia, and immunoglobulin
deficiency. Skin abnormalities include the characteristic dermatitis herpetiformis rash.
Cavitating mesenteric lymph node syndrome (CMLNS) is a very rare complication of celiac disease.
The central portion of affected lymph nodes become low attenuation due to liquid necrosis. CMLNS is
thought to be highly specific for celiac disease when seen in combination with villous atrophy and splenic
atrophy. The differential diagnosis of low attenuation mesenteric lymph nodes includes TB, Whipple
disease, treated lymphoma, and CMLNS.
Infectious enteritis
Several bacterial, viral, and fungal organisms may cause enteritis.
Yersinia and TB have a propensity to affect the terminal ileum, mimicking Crohn's disease.
Salmonella is the most common cause of food-born gastroenteritis and causes segmental
distal small bowel thickening on CT and segmental nodular thickened folds on fluoroscopy.
Whipple disease
Whipple disease is due to infection by Tropheryma whippeli, which manifests in the GI tract
as malabsorption and abdominal pain. Whipple disease may cause arthralgias and increased
skin pigmentation.
Whipple disease characteristically causes low attenuation adenopathy that may appear
similar to the cavitating mesenteric lymph node syndrome seen in celiac disease.
Radiographically, Whipple disease causes thickening and nodularity of duodenal and
proximal small bowel folds. In contrast to celiac disease, there is typically no hypersecretion.
Radiation enteritis
Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows wall
thickening of the distal ileum, most
prominent in the deep pelvis, with
hyperenhancement of the inner mucosa
and mesenteric vessel engorgement.
Although the findings are nonspecific,
given the patient had recently completed
radiation to the pelvis, this likely represents
radiation enteritis.
Long-term effects of radiation to the pelvis include adhesive and fibrotic changes to the
mesentery and small bowel.
Clues to the diagnosis of radiation enteritis include a history of radiation therapy and
regional involvement of bowel loops not confined to a vascular territory and matching the
radiation field.
Imaging findings include mural thickening and mucosal hyperenhancement (in the acute
stages) with narrowing of the lumen (in the later stages). Radiation enteritis may be a cause
of SBO.
GI: 208