SOLID PANCREATIC EPITHELIAL NEOPLASMS
Adenocarcinoma (ductal adenocarcinoma)
PD
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma of the head causing the double duct sign: Two coronal images from a contrast-
enhanced CT show marked dilation of the common bile duct (CBD), moderate dilation of the pancreatic duct
(PD), and the obstructing, ill-defined hypoattenuating mass in the pancreatic head (red arrows).
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma accounts for 80-90% of all pancreatic tumors. It is
typically seen in patients over age 60, with a slight male predominance. Risk factors include
smoking, alcohol use, chronic pancreatitis, and family history of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
A pancreatic mass protocol CT includes early arterial phase, late arterial phase (pancreatic
phase), and portal venous phase images. The late arterial phase (pancreatic parenchymal
phase) has the greatest conspicuity for detecting the hypoenhancing tumor against the
background enhancing pancreas.
The most common location for a tumor to arise is the pancreatic head where it often
causes ductal obstruction. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is usually hypoenhancing relative
to pancreatic parenchyma and results in upstream (towards the tail) ductal dilatation and
parenchymal atrophy. The double duct sign describes dilation of both the pancreatic duct
and the CBD due to obstruction by the pancreatic head mass.
Since pancreatic adenocarcinoma is almost always associated with a dilated pancreatic duct,
an alternative diagnosis should be strongly considered if there is a pancreatic mass with no
ductal dilation, such as:
Autoimmune pancreatitis.
Duodenal gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST).
Groove pancreatitis.
Peripancreatic lymph node.
Cystic pancreatic tumor.
Pancreatic metastasis (e.g., renal cell, thyroid, or melanoma).
Neuroendocrine tumor.
Lymphoma.
Conversely, if a dilated pancreatic duct or double duct sign is present but no mass is visible,
one should still be suspicious for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Approximately 10% of lesions
will be isoattenuating relative to pancreas and/or difficult to visualize on a portal venous
phase CT and thus extremely difficult to detect.
When evaluating whether a pancreatic neoplasm is resectable, it is important to evaluate
for any vascular variants and to determine tumor involvement of the nearby vessels: SMA
(including first jejunal branch), SMV, portal vein, celiac axis, common hepatic artery, and
splenic artery.
Abutment: <180° circumferential contact with vessel.
Encasement: >180° circumferential contact and/or deformation of the vessel.
Limited extension to the duodenum, distal stomach, or CBD does not preclude resection, as
these structures are resected during a Whipple procedure.
GI: 155