Prostatitis (continued)
Prostatitis can be diffuse or focal and typically occurs within the peripheral zone. On
MRI, regions of T2 hypointense signal and mild-moderate diffusion restriction are due to
inflammatory cellular infiltrates. Both prostatitis and prostate cancer show increased and
early enhancement. Compared to prostate cancer, chronic prostatitis shows less diffusion
restriction.
Another type of prostatitis, granulomatous prostatitis, is usually idiopathic and self-limited.
PROSTATE CANCER
Overview of prostate cancer imaging
Most prostate cancers (90%) occur in the peripheral zone.
Histologically, prostate cancers are classified by the Gleason scale (1-5) where the first
number is the predominant pattern and the second number is the secondary pattern.
The most important goal of MRI is to distinguish between surgical and nonsurgical disease.
Cancer that is contained within the gland (tumor stage T2) is generally amenable to radical
prostatectomy, while cancer that has spread outside of the gland is typically treated non-
surgically (e.g., anti-androgen and radiation therapy).
MRI may not detect all prostate cancers: low Gleason (<7) grade prostate cancers are
typically not detectable; some cancers are not T2 hypointense; central zone cancers are
difficult to detect on T2-weighted images; and cancer conspicuity is decreased if the
peripheral zone is not T2 hyperintense due to underlying disease, such as chronic prostatitis.
Pitfalls of imaging include prostatitis and involutional changes from androgen-deprivation
therapy which may appear as abnormal T2 hypointense lesions.
Post-biopsy normal prostatic tissue is T1 hyperintense due to high concentration of citrate
that causes more bleeding (right image, yellow arrows). Neoplastic tissue does not produce
as much citrate and will bleed less, resulting in the hemorrhage exclusion sign (red arrows).
Post-biopsy T1-weighted post-contrast
MR with fat suppression demonstrates
T1 hyperintense bleeding within normal
prostatic tissue peripherally (yellow
arrows). Prostate cancer (red arrows) does
not bleed, resulting in the hemorrhage
exclusion. sign.
Prostate cancer typically shows: (1) restricted diffusion with high signal on high B-value
DWI and low signal on ADC, (2) low T2 signal, and (3) early enhancement relative to the
surrounding peripheral zone.
DWI assessment is usually qualitative, not quantitative, but active research is under way to determine
thresholds for ADC value(s).
MRI spectroscopy of prostate cancer may show elevated choline and depressed citrate
peaks compared to normal prostate, but it is not routinely performed in most centers.
Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS)
Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS) was designed to provide a global
standard for reporting and interpreting multiparametric prostate MRI. Using PI-RADS system
improves communication of clinically significant cancer, increases confidence in benign
disease and dormant malignancies, and reduces unnecessary biopsies and treatments.
GU: 281