Tc-99m HMPAO leukocytes (WBCs)
The advantages of a WBC scan labeled with Tc-99m HMPAO compared to In-111 are related
to the shorter half-life of Tc-99m, which allows a higher administered activity, better counts,
a lower absorbed dose, and ability to perform earlier imaging. For these reasons, Tc-99m is
often preferred in children in appropriate cases.
However, a major disadvantage is physiologic uptake within the gastrointestinal and
genitourinary tracts due to unbound Tc-99m HMPAO complexes, which limits bowel
evaluation. Renal activity occurs early, while bowel activity is seen after 1-2 hours.
Additionally, delayed imaging is less practical with Tc-99m due to its shorter half-life.
Gallium-67
Gallium-67 is cyclotron-produced and decays by electron
capture, with a half-life of 78 hours. It emits multiple gamma
rays at 93, 184, 296, and 388 keV (easier to remember as 90,
190, 290, and 390 kev). Gallium binds to transferrin, which is
found in infection, inflammation, and neoplasm.
Normal distribution includes the nasopharynx, lacrimal and
salivary glands, liver, colon, and bone marrow. Use is limited in
the abdomen due to high bowel and liver uptake.
Persistent gallium in the kidneys is never normal after 24 hours
and signifies renal disease or obstruction.
Diffuse pulmonary uptake is also not normal, with a wide
differential of infectious and inflammatory conditions:
Pneumocystis pneumonia, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis,
lymphangitic carcinomatosis, miliary tuberculosis, and fungal infection.
The panda sign reflects increased uptake in the nasopharynx,
parotid glands, and lacrimal glands due to inflammation,
resembling the dark markings on a panda's face. It is classically
seen in sarcoidosis.
Normal Gallium-67 scan
The panda sign is not specific for sarcoidosis, although it strongly
(5.25 mCi administered)
suggests sarcoid when the A sign is also seen (due to bilateral hilar
shows high uptake in the
and right paratracheal adenopathy). Sarcoid is also the most common
bowel and salivary glands,
disorder to affect the salivary and lacrimal glands symmetrically.
moderate uptake in the liver
Differential diagnosis of the panda sign includes Sjogren syndrome,
and bone marrow, and faint
lymphoma after irradiation, and AIDS.
uptake in the lungs.
Gallium scans have been largely replaced by F-18 FDG PET/CT. A residual first-line application
of gallium scan is the evaluation of spinal discovertebral osteomyelitis.
Thallium-201
Thallium-201 is cyclotron-produced, decays by electron capture, and produces relatively
low-energy characteristic: x-rays of 69-81 keV. Its half-life is 73 hours. Normal distribution is
prominent uptake in the kidneys, heart, liver, thyroid, and bowel.
Thallium imaging is infrequently used due to its long half-life and resultant high radiation
exposure. Historically, thallium has been used in combination with gallium scan to
distinguish between Kaposi sarcoma, lymphoma, and tuberculosis in immunocompromised
patients. Thallium was also historically used as a myocardial agent.
Nucs: 482