Perfusion stroke imaging (continued)
The DAWN and DEFUSE 3 trials have led to implementation of perfusion imaging in
routine acute stroke evaluation to identify patients who could benefit from mechanical
thrombectomy with an expanded time window.
The DAWN trial used a combination of the age-adjusted NIH stroke scale score and the core infarct size
from CT perfusion or MR DWI (clinical-core mismatch) as an eligibility criterion to select patients with
anterior circulation LVO for thrombectomy between 6-24 hours of last known normal, and demonstrated
an overall benefit in functional outcome in the intervention group.
The DEFUSE 3 trial used a discrepancy between the penumbra and thei ischemic core (perfusion-core
mismatch) and maximum core size as imaging criteria to select patients with anterior circulation LVO
between 6-16 hours from last known normal for mechanical thrombectomy. Thet trial showed a benefit in
functional outcome at 90 days in the intervention group.
Acute stroke: Perfusion imaging
Important hemodynamic parameters calculated from a perfusion study are listed below:
Cerebral blood volume (CBV): Blood volume per unit brain tissue (mL/100 g).
Cerebral blood flow (CBF): Volume of blood flowing per unit brain tissue per minute (mL/100 g/min).
Mean transit time (MTT): Average time (sec) for contrast bolus to transverse a voxel.
Time to maximum (Tmax) or time to peak (TTP): Time (sec) from scan start to maximum intensity of
contrast bolus in voxel. Delay time (DT) and time to drain (TTD) are similar measurements.
CBF, CBV, and MTT are related by the central volume equation:
cerebral blood flow (CBF) = cerebral blood volume (CBV) / mean transit time (MTT)
The infarct core and ischemic penumbra can be estimated from the imaging parameters, for
which specific thresholds have been established in recent clinical trials to more accurately
differentiate and quantify the two tissue types. Automated perfusion post-processing
softwares are also available to aid interpretation.
Traditional perfusion maps
Thresholds used in automated CT perfusion softwares
Markedly decreased CBF, matched by
Infarct core
Defined by CBF <30-45% depending on software
decreased CBV
Mildly decreased CBF, mismatched by
Ischemic increased or normal CBV
Defined by Tmax >6 sec,
penumbra
or DT >3 sec
Increased MTT and Tmax
The exact perfusion thresholds differ by software vendor and are evolving as new clinical
trials are carried out. Also, the thresholds pertain to the anterior circulation only. Utility of
perfusion imaging in posterior circulation strokes is still undergoing investigation.
CBF
CBV
TTD, similar to Tmax
Color perfusion maps show focal region of markedly decreased cerebral blood flow (CBF) and matched
markedly reduced cerebral blood volume (CBV) in the left frontal lobe, corresponding to infarcted tissue
(yellow arrows). There is a larger area of penumbra (white boxes) in the left ACA and MCA1 territories that
demonstrates mildly reduced CBF, increased CBV, and prolonged time to drain (TTD).
Neuro Brain: 674