GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ANGIOGRAPHY
VASCULAR ACCESS
Femoral arterial access technique
needle should enter skin here
(inferomedial femoral head)
needle should be angled 45 degrees cranially
for retrograde access (toi the aorta)
needle should be angled 45 degrees caudally
for anterograde access (to the leg)
The common femoral artery (CFA) is the most common
site for arterial access. Prior to obtaining access,
distal pulse and capillary refill should be checked, and
confirmed again after the procedure.
The CFA begins inferior to the inguinal ligament. From
lateral to medial, the mnemonic NAVL helps to localize
the femoral nerve, artery, vein, and lymphatics.
The ideal position to access the femoral artery is the
inferomedial margin of the femoral head, for two reasons.
First, the femoral head provides a hard surface to press
nerve artery vein lymphatics
against to provide adequate hemostasis. Second, at
the level of the femoral head, the femoral artery and
nerve are side by side. Additionally, if arterial puncture
is performed too low, the femoral vein may be traversed
with possible formation of arteriovenous fistula.
Transradial artery access
While access via the radial artery has been largely adopted for coronary interventions, this is
only starting to gain traction for the general IR practice, often limited by operator experience
and training.
Advantages include earlier post-procedure ambulation, more effective hemostasis and
patient comfort.
Disadvantages include higher rates of vasospasm (mitigated with an antispasmodic cocktail
of heparin, nitroglycerin, and verapamil) and radial artery occlusion (can occur between
2-10% of cases).
Barbeau's test is an alternative to the Allen's test for evaluating collateral circulation of the
hand. It involves placing a pulse oximeter on the ipsilateral thumb and then evaluating the
morphology of the plethysmography tracing before, immediately after and two minutes
after manual occlusion of the radial artery. Patients with type D tracing morphology have
absent and non-recruitable flow, and should not undergo transradial catheterization.
The reverse Barbeau test is used for ulnar artery access. The pulse oximeter should be
placed on the fifth finger when testing occlusion of the ulnar artery.
IR: 596