Biliary atresia (continued)
Treatment is the Kasai portoenterostomy, a palliative procedure ideally performed before
3 months of age. The entire extrahepatic biliary tree is excised and a jejunal Roux loop
is anastomosed to the cut surface of the liver capsule. 80% of children with a successful
surgery survive 10 years, at which point a liver transplant is necessary.
Biliary atresia is associated with polysplenia and trisomy 18.
PEDIATRIC HEPATOBILIARY NEOPLASIA AND MASSES
Primary pediatric liver tumors may be classified as epithelial nepatocyte-derved, or
mesenchymal, with benign and malignant tumors in each category. Liver metastases may be
seen in the setting of neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, sarcoma, and Burkitt lymphoma.
It is usually possible to narrow the differential based on imaging appearance (cystic or solid),
age of the patient, and tumor markers (AFP and endothelial growth factor).
Benign epithelial lesions also seen in adults, including focal nodular hyperplasia and
adenoma, are discussed in the gastrointestinal imaging section.
CYSTIC LIVER/BILIARY MASSES
Mesenchymal hamartoma
Mesenchymal hamartoma: Coronal (left image) and sagittal (right image) contrast-enhanced CT shows a
massive, heterogeneous mass arising from the right lobe of the liver. The displaced liver parenchyma forms a
claw sign around the mass (yellow arrows). There are cystic spaces (red arrows) and portal venous fragments
within the mass; however, the mass appears predominantly solid, which may be secondary to numerous tiny
cysts below the resolution of CT. Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Mesenchymal hamartoma is a benign, multicystic, hamartomatous lesion, which contains
malformed bile ducts, portal vein fragments, and often extramedullary hematopoiesis. It is
considered a developmental anomaly rather than a neoplasm.
Most children present in the neonatal period with an enlarging abdominal mass, with 80%
diagnosed by two years of age.
In contrast to hepatoblastoma, tumor markers are not elevated.
Imaging of mesenchymal hamartoma typically shows a large, multicystic, abdominal mass.
The cysts can be of various sizes, can contain debris, and can be divided by septae of
variable thickness. Hemorrhage and calcification are rare. Occasionally, the cysts may be SO
small that the mass appears solid. When large, the mass may displace vasculature.
Surgical resection is almost always curative.
Peds: 1140