Left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery
The left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery courses in the anterior interventricular
groove, which is the anatomic groove between the right and left ventricles.
The LAD gives off the diagonal branches (LAD-Diagonal) and septal branches, which
penetrate the interventricular septum to supply blood to the anterior 1/2 of the septum.
Left circumflex (LCx) coronary artery
The left circumflex (LCx) coronary artery courses underneath the left atrial appendage in the
left atrioventricular groove (between the left ventricle and left atrium).
The LCx artery gives off the obtuse marginal (OM; circOMflex) branch, which supplies the
posterolateral wall of the left ventricle. The left margin of the heart has an obtuse angle,
hence the name.
The LCx uncommonly (-7%) supplies the posterior descending artery (PDA), which is the
criteria for a left-dominant system. In the anatomic diagram on the previous page, the more
common right-dominant system is shown, where the right coronary artery supplies the PDA.
Right coronary artery (RCA)
Axial
Axial
Axial
Sagittal
RCA (yellow arrow). arises RCA (yellow arrow) gives RCA (yellow arrow) gives Sagittal thick-slice MIP
from the right coronary off acute marginal (blue off PDA (green arrow)
shows the complete
cusp and gives off the SA arrow), which courses
in this right-dominant
course of RCA (yellow
nodal branch (red arrow). along the anterior RV wall. system.
arrows).
The right coronary artery (RCA) mirrors the LCx in course, sitting within the right
atrioventricular groove. The first branches of the RCA are the conal branch anteriorly
(supplies the right ventricular outflow tract) and the sinoatrial node branch posteriorly.
The RCA gives off an acute marginal branch which courses anterior to the right ventricular
(RV) free wall and muscular branches to supply the RV free wall (not drawn). Margin of the
RV has an acute angle, hence the name.
The atrioventricular nodal branch (AVN) branches off at the crux junction of all 4 chambers
where the atrioventricular and interventricular grooves intersect).
The posterior descending artery (PDA) arises from the RCA in approximately 85% to supply
the posterior 1/2 of the ventricular septum.
The terminal branch of the RCA is most commonly the posterolateral artery (PLA) that
supplies the posterior left ventricle.
Determination of dominance
The side which supplies the PDA, PLA, and AVN is the dominant coronary artery. Most
commonly, in about 85% of cases, the RCA is the dominant artery.
Left-dominant anatomy is uncommon, occurring in approximately 7% of cases. In left-
dominant anatomy, the LCx supplies the PDA, PLA, and AVN.
Codominant anatomy can also be seen in approximately 7% of cases, typically with the RCA
supplying the PDA, while the LCx supplies PLA.
Cardiac: 508