Approach to a thyroid nodule (continued)
The American College of Radiology white papers have published guidelines on management
of incidental thyroid nodules detected on CT or MRI. In the absence of suspicious features
on CT or MRI, a thyroid ultrasound is recommended when nodules 21 cm in patients <35
years old, and when nodules >1.5 cm in patients >35 years old. Nodules that do not meet
size criteria do not require further evaluation.
Thyroid cancer
Thyroid carcinoma: Sagittal (left image) and transverse grayscale images through the left lobe of the thyroid
demonstrate a solid nodule (calipers) with irregular borders containing punctate calcifications (arrows).
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Papillary cancer is by far the most common histologic subtype of thyroid cancer, and confers
the best prognosis. Lymphangitic spread is common, and therefore cervical, sometimes
cystic, ymphadenopathy is common. Lymph nodes may also be calcified, colloid-containing,
or vascular.
Follicular carcinomas tend to spread hematogenously and have the next best prognosis.
Medullary subtypes are less common and more aggressive and are associated with MEN II
syndrome. The anaplastic subtype is very rare and has the worst prognosis.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can also occur in the thyroid and usually presents as a solid nodule.
PARATHYROID
Anatomy
Parathyroid glands are usually found adjacent to the thyroid gland. Most patients have four
glands, but there may be between two and six.
Ectopic locations of the parathyroid glands include the upper mediastinum, in the
tracheoesopnagea. groove, or at the thoracic inlet.
Indications for imaging
The most frequent indication for parathyroid imaging is workup of hypercalcemia for
identification of a parathyroid adenoma and/or hyperplasia.
Patients frequently go straight to curative surgical exploration. In this population, up to
10% of patients develop persistent or recurrent disease after initial surgery. Therefore,
parathyroid localization is more frequently indicated in the re-operative setting.
MEN li is associated with parathyroid adenomas or hyperplasia.
Malignant neoplasms of the parathyroid (parathyroid carcinoma) are rare and distinction
can be made with benign adenomas based on rapid growth, local aggressive behavior, and
presence of lymph node metastases.
Neuro Head & Neck: 858