Facet septic arthritis
Axial T2-weighted MRI
Sagittal STIR MRI
Facet septic arthritis: There is prominent edema posterior to the right facet joint (yellow arrows), which is far
more conspicuous on the STIR image, as both fat and fluid are similar signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging
without fat suppression. Although there is no apparent effusion within the facet joint (red arrow), there is
dorsal distension of the capsule evident on the sagittal image (blue arrow).
Facet septic arthritis is uncommon, but should be considered when the degree of
periarticular inflammatory change is out of proportion to a relatively milder degree of
degeneration.
Far more common is active facet arthropathy, which typically demonstrates characteristic
imaging features of osteoarthritis including subchondral irregularity, cystic change, and
osteophytes.
Tuberculous osteomyelitis
Also called Pott disease, tuberculous osteomyelitis is vertebral infection with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Unlike pyogenic discits/osteomyelitis, the discs are usually
spared as M. tuberculosis lacks the proteolytic enzymes to break down the disc substance.
Pott disease classically causes wedge-shaped compression of the anterior aspect of the
vertebral body, often leading to a gibbus deformity centered at the infected vertebra.
Gibbus deformity is an acutely angled kyphosis, which may result from a compression fracture or can
be seen in congenital syndromes including achondroplasia and the mucopolypacchandoses (Hunter and
Hurler syndromes).
Approximately 10% of patients with Pott disease have active pulmonary tuberculosis.
MISCELLANEOUS SPINAL DISORDERS
EXTRADURAL SPINAL METABOLIC LESIONS
Epidural lipomatosis
Spinal epidural lipomatosis is a nonneoplastic overgrowth of unencapsulated fat in the
epidural space, which may cause compression of neural elements. In severe cases, epidural
lipomatosis may cause cauda equina syndrome.
The most common cause of epidural lipomatosis is steroid administration. Other causes
include obesity and endogenous Cushing syndrome; some cases are idiopathic.
MRI shows expansion of the epidural space that follows fat signal on all sequences. While
some epidural fat is normal, more than 6 mm in thickness in the mid thoracic level suggests
epidural lipomatosis.
Spine: 893