Coronary artery aneurysm
CLINICAL
C
W/L186H42
Zme I3IKA Angle "oy
ASGGRAZA
VR:
Oblique 3D reformatted image (left) and axial CT image (right) show an aneurysm (arrows) at the bifurcation of
the LAD and first diagonal branch in this patient with a history of Kawasaki disease.
Aneursymal dilatation of the coronary artery is rare and most commonly caused by
atherosclerosis in the United States, and Kawasaki disease worldwide.
Coronary artery aneurysms can be found incidentally on imaging in an asymptomatic
patient, or can present with angina or acute coronary syndrome.
Management of coronary artery aneurysm varies depending on patient's clinical
presentation and risk assessment.
CARDIAC MRI
IMAGING TECHNIQUES
Cardiac MRI provides high-resolution dynamic imaging of the heart using different pulse
sequences.
Spin echo (SE) has longer acquisition time but yields high spatial resolution and excellent
contrast while generating little artifact from metal. Single slices are generated from a single
breath hold. SE is used for anatomy.
Spoiled gradient recalled echo (GRE) is faster but more susceptible to metal artifacts. GRE is
used for quantitative measurements, perfusion, and angiography.
Balanced steady-state free precession (SSFP) is a family of
SSFP
"bright blood" gradient echo sequences. This technique
provides high temporal resolution and excellent contrast
between myocardium and blood pool. ECG-triggered
segmented SSFP is gathered over several heart beats to
create a cine to evaluate wall motion, valve function,
volume quantification, and can be performed before or
after contrast administration.
Inversion recovery (IR)
IR pulse nulls the signal from the normal myocardium to accentuate pathology based on
picking the appropriate inversion time (TI) on a series of scout images. Normal myocardium
is nulled with TI of approximately 300-400 ms after the RF pulse and therefore appears
black. The inversion time varies based on volume, contrast relaxivity, excretion rates, and
field strength.
Cardiac: 514