Venous anatomy of the leg
The superficial venous system is
composed of the great and small
common femoral
saphenous veins.
vein
The great saphenous vein drains into
deepi femoral vein
the commont femoral vein. Although the
great saphenous vein is technically part
of the superficial system, clots near the
femoral vein
saphenofemoral. junction are typically
treated with anticoagulation because of
their propensity to become dislodged.
The small saphenous vein drains into the
adductor hiatus
popliteal vein (which continues proximally
as thet femoral vein). Clots in the small
saphenous vein are typically not treated.
popliteal vein
Deep venous system anatomy mirrors
arterial anatomy:
The common femoral vein (CFV) drains
into the external iliac vein and begins at anterior tibial vein
the level of thei inguinal ligament. The CFV
peroneal vein
lies medial to the common femoral artery.
CFV tributaries include the femoral and
posterior tibial vein
deep femoral veins. The femoral vein was
previously called the superficial femoral
vein.
The term. superficial femoral vein should
-
lateral
medial A
be avoided as it wrongly implies that
this vein is part of the superficial venous
system.
The three paired deep calf veins are the anterior tibial (lateral), peroneal (middle), and posterior tibial
(medial) veins, which join to form the popliteal vein (PV). The PV continues into the femoral vein.
The gastrocnemius and soleal veins are muscular veins also considered part of the deep venous system.
DISTAL AORTA, ILIAC, PELVIC, AND LEG ARTERIES PATHOLOGIES
Iliac artery aneurysm
An iliac artery aneurysm is defined as common iliac artery diameter >2.5 cm. Ectasia is
defined as >1.7 cm in males and >1.5 cm in females. Repair is recommended once the
diameter is >3.0 cm.
lliac artery aneurysms are typically seen in older men and are associated with abdominal
aortic aneurysms. They are most commonly associated with atherosclerosis. lliac aneurysms
may also be due to connective tissue diseases, such as Marfan syndrome.
Cross-sectional imaging is recommended if an iliac stenosis is seen first on angiography.
An iliac aneurysm with intraluminal thrombus can simulate an atherosclerotic stenosis on
angiography.
CTA or MRA can be done for the diagnosis and treatment planning.
In appropriate candidates, endovascular stent-graft is the preferred treatment for an iliac
artery aneurysm.
Mass effect from the aneurysm may cause neurologic and urologic symptoms, in which case
surgical treatment is recommended. Endovascular aneurysm repair cannot rapidly decrease
aneurysm size, although endovascularly treated aneurysms do gradually decrease in size.
Vascular: 580