Rheumatoid arthritis in the spine
The cervical spine is involved in up to 70% of patients. Involvement is increased with more
severe and long-standing disease.
The general pattern of rheumatoid arthritis in the cervical spine includes subluxation at
multiple levels, osteopenia, and erosions of the odontoid, facet joints, vertebral endplates,
and spinous processes. Unlike osteoarthritis, there is no bone production.
A characteristic finding of rheumatoid arthritis is atlantoaxial (C1-C2) subluxation.
Atlantoaxial subluxation may occur in multiple directions, including anterior (most common),
posterior, vertical (atlantoaxial impaction), rotatory, and lateral.
Anterior atlantoaxial subluxation is caused by inflammation and resultant laxity of the
transverse ligament, which normally functions to stabilize the atlantoaxial joint.
Dens
Transversel ligament:
Extends across the dens
from lateral masses of C1,
maintains densi in contact
witha anteriora arch of C1.
Illustration and T2-weighted axial MRI demonstrating the transverse ligament, which stabilizes the
atlantoaxial (C1-C2) articulation between the dens (C2) and C1.
Anterior atlantoaxial subluxation may not be apparent if flexion radiographs are not obtained.
Anterior atlantoaxial subluxation is present if the atlanto-dental interval (ADI) is >2.5 mm (>5 mm in
children). The atlanto-dental interval is the distance between the anterior aspect of the dens and the
posterior aspect of the anterior ring of C1.
Lateral radiograph of the cervical spine in
Lateral radiograph of the same patient in flexion
extension demonstrates the atlanto-dental demonstrates marked widening of the atlanto-dental
interval (calipers) measuring less than 2.5 mm. interval (calipers), indicating atlanto-axial instability.
Vertical atlantoaxial subluxation (also called atlantoaxial impaction) results from C1-C2
facet erosion and collapse, leading to protrusion of the odontoid through the foramen
magnum. This may compress the midbrain.
Direct visualization of the odontoid is usually not possible on a lateral radiograph, but impaction may
cause the anterior arch of C1 (normally in-line with the odontoid) to sink to the level of the body of C2.
In the setting of RA, posterior atlantoaxial subluxation is usually due to odontoid erosion. It
may also be caused by odontoid fracture.
MSK: 917