POLYPOSIS SYNDROMES AFFECTING THE BOWEL
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an
autosomal-dominant syndrome featuring
innumerable premalignant adenomatous
polyps in the colon and to a lesser extent the
small bowel. The risk of colon cancer is 100%
with average onset of development at 39
years. Prophylactic colectomy is the standard
of care to prevent colon cancer.
Gastric polyps are also present, although the
gastric polyps are hyperplastic and are not
premalignant.
Gardner syndrome is a variant of FAP. In
addition to colon polyps, patients also have:
Desmoid tumors.
Osteomas.
Papillary thyroid cancer.
Epidermoid cysts.
Mnemonic: DOPE Gardner
FAP: Coronal CT image demonstrates fluid-filled
Turcot syndrome is another variant of FAP. In colon with innumerable polypoid enhancing lesions
addition to colon polyps, patients also have (arrows) seen throughout the ascending, transverse,
CNS tumors (gliomas and medullobastomas, descending, and sigmoid colon and into the rectum.
Mnemonic: TURbans go over your head
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer syndrome (HNPCC) = Lynch syndrome
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) syndrome (also called Lynch syndrome) is an
autosomal dominant polyposis syndrome caused by DNA mismatch repair, leading to colon
cancer from microsatellite instability on a molecular level. Risk of colon cancer is less than
with FAP. Similar to FAP, the colon polyps of HNPCC are adenomatous.
HNPCC is associated with other cancers, including endometrial, gastric, small bowel, liver,
and biliary malignancies.
Peutz-Jeghers
Peutz-Jeghers is an autosomal dominant syndrome that features multiple hamartomatous
pedunculated polyps, usually in the small bowel. These polyps may act as lead points and
cause intussusception.
Characteristic skin manifestations include perioral mucocutaneous blue/brown pigmented
spots on the lips and gums.
Peutz-Jeghers is associated with gynecologic neoplasms as well as gastric, duodenal, and
colonic malignancies.
Cowden syndrome
Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominant syndrome of multiple hamartomatous polyps
most commonly found in the skin and external mucous membranes, but also in the GI tract.
Cowden syndrome is associated with an increased risk of thyroid cancer (usually follicular),
as well as skin, oral, breast, and uterine malignancies.
GI: 221