Sacrococcygeal teratoma
Sagittal ultrasound of the fetal torso
and lumbosacral spine shows al large,
heterogeneous, solid and cystic mass
(arrows) arising from the sacrum/
coccyx.
In contrast to myelomeningocele,
the lumbosacral spine demonstrates
normal tapering and the overlying skin
is intact.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf MD,
Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates,
Boston.
Sacrococcygeal teratoma is a germ cell tumor of the sacrum. It often presents prenatally as a
mixed solid and cystic complex mass.
Sacrococcygeal teratoma may be associated with high output cardiac failure.
The other primary differential consideration for a distal fetal spinal mass is a
myelomeningocele (Chiari II). Assessing the brain will be useful as it is always abnormal with
a myelomeningocele and normal with a sacrococcygeal teratoma.
FETAL FACE
Evaluation of the fetal face
The fetal face should be examined for the presence of two orbits, normal nose and lips,
nasal bone and a normal sized chin on sagittal profile view.
Absent nasal bone
normal
absentnasalhone
nasal bone,
Sagittal ultrasound of the fetal profile showing normal nasal bone in one fetus (left image) and absence of the
nasal bone in a different fetus (right image; arrows).
A hypoplastic or absent nasal bone is associated with trisomy 21 if seen on first trimester
ultrasound, and with aneuploidy if seen on second or third trimester ultrasound in patients
with other markers of aneuploidy.
Cleft lip and palate
Facial clefts are associated with aneuploidy (including trisomies 13 and 18), cardiac and CNS
anomalies, or less commonly present as an isolated finding. Discovery of a facial cleft should
therefore prompt a search for additional structural abnormalities.
On imaging, a linear defect is seen extending from the lip to the nostril (cleft lip), and may
further extend through the alveolar ridge and palate (cleft lip and palate). The defect may be
unilateral or bilateral.
Large facial clefts may affect fetal swallowing and lead to polyhydramnios.
Obstetrics: 353