Bronchial artery embolization (continued)
The bronchial arteries arise from the thoracic aorta at T5-T6, although the arterial anatomy
is quite variable. There are usually one or two bronchial arteries on each side.
Embolization is performed with a distal embolic agent, most commonly particles. Initial
angiography should carefully evaluate for the rare presence of a left to right shunt prior to
particle embolization to prevent inadvertent cerebral embolization. Embolization is usually
performed to near-stasis.
Because rebleeding after treatment is common, coils are rarely used to treat hemoptysis. Because coils
prevent repeat access, the use of coils would preclude retreatment.
A potentially devastating complication is nontarget embolization of the spinal cord via the
anterior spinal artery or smaller tributaries arising from bronchial and intercostal arteries. A
complete neurological exam should be documented prior to the procedure.
Pulmonary massive hemoptysis
Before performing a pulmonary angiogram, it is essential to evaluate an EKG to ensure that
a left bundle branch block (LBBB) is not present. If the pulmonary artery catheter were to
cause temporary right bundle branch block in the presence of a LBBB, the lack of left-sided
conduction may cause complete heart block, which can be fatal. A temporary pacer should
be placed prior to pulmonary arteriography in the presence of a LBBB.
Normal right-sided pressures:
Right atrium: 0-8 mmHg.
Right ventricle: 0-8 mmHg diastolic; 15-30 mmHg systolic.
Pulmonary artery: 3-12 mmHg diastolic; 15-30 mmHg systolic.
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
Contrast-enhanced CT demonstrates a pulmonary AVM Nonselective DSA early arterial phase angiography
with the feeding artery (yellow arrow) and draining of the left pulmonary artery in LAO orientation with
vein (red arrow). Although not shown on this image, a pigtail catheter in the left PA shows a faint contrast
the feeding artery arises from the pulmonary artery blush representing the AVM nidus (arrow). Venous
and the draining vein drains to the left atrium.
drainage is not yet visible. This was treated with coils.
Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
A pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is an abnormal connection between the
pulmonary artery and pulmonary veins, causing a right to left shunt.
Patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), also known as Osler-Weber-
Rendu syndrome, may have multiple pulmonary AVMS. HHT can clinically present with brain
abscess, stroke, or recurrent epistaxis (due to nasal mucosa telangiectasia).
IR: 608