Renal abscess
Renal abscess is a focal necrotic parenchymal infection with a defined wall within the kidney
that most commonly results from coalescence of small microabscesses in the setting of
acute bacterial pyelonephritis. An abscess may simulate a cystic renal mass.
Urinalysis may be negative in up to 30% of the time if the infection does not involve the
collecting system.
Ultrasound shows a fluid-filled mass with a distinct thick wall, which may be multiloculated.
Small abscesses (K3 cm) often undergo a trial of conservative medical therapy, while larger
abscesses typically undergo percutaneous drainage.
Emphysematous pyelonephritis
Emphysematous pyelonephritis: Axial (left image) and coronal CT with oral contrast only shows gas replacing
the superior and lateral aspect of the left kidney (yellow arrow). There is gas extending into the left ureter, best
seen on the coronal (red arrow).
Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a complication of acute pyelonephritis characterized
by replacement of renal parenchyma by gas. It is caused by gas-forming organisms, most
commonly E. coli. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is almost exclusively seen in diabetic or
immunocompromised individuals.
Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a surgical emergency requiring broad-spectrum antibiotics
and emergent nephrectomy. Mortality can reach 40%.
Ultrasound shows igh-amplitude echoes in the renal parenchyma representing gas locules
with posterior dirty acoustic shadowing.
Renal tuberculosis
Mycobacterlum tuberculosis infection of the renal parenchyma results from hematogenous
dissemination. Active pulmonary TB is present in approximately 10%.
Although initial renal TB infection typically involves both kidneys, chronic changes tend to be
unilateral.
Imaging findings are characterized by focal cavitary renal lesions with calcification. In
addition, scarring, papillary necrosis, and infundibular strictures can be seen.
End-stage renal TB produces auto nephrectomy and the characteristic putty kidney
appearance, which represents an atrophic, calcified kidney.
GU: 254