PRINCIPLES OF EMBOLIZATION
Embolic materials
The two main categories of embolic materials are permanent (coils, plugs, particles, glue,
and sclerosing agent) and temporary (absorbable gelatin sponge and autologous clot).
Coils create thrombosis by inducing vascular stasis. The main advantage of coils is the ability
for precise and quick placement, without distal embolization. The primary disadvantage is
sacrifice of distal access: Once a vessel is coiled, it cannot be re-accessed for retreatment.
When using coils for embolization of a specific lesion, the general technique is to first coil distal to the
lesion, then proximal to it. This prevents recurrent bleeding from retrograde collaterals.
Plugs are cylinder-shaped baskets that act similarly to coils but are used for larger vessels
with high flow rates. These are commonly used in splenic trauma or plug-assisted gastric
variceal embolization (PARTO).
Particles are microscopic (diameter measured in microns) entities that flow distally to
occlude small capillaries. Particles can be made of trisacyl gelatin or polyvinyl alcohol.
Common uses include for tumors and various organs. Careful consideration must be used to
avoid nontarget embolization.
Liquid embolic agents (e.g., glue) can be injected to quickly embolize a structure.
Cyanoacrylate and ethylene vinyl alcohol are examples of glue that rapidly polymerizes
when it comes in contact with blood.
Sclerosant agents damage the endothelial cells of the vessel wall, causing the vessel
to shrink and dissolve over a period of weeks. Sodium tetradecyl sulfate, polidocanol,
and ethanol are examples of sclerosants and can be used to treat lymphovascular
malformations, varices or smaller varicose veins.
Absorbable gelatin sponge/slurry is the most commonly used temporary embolic agent,
lasting 2-6 weeks. Common use is for emergent traumatic bleeding. Of important note,
post-procedural CT imaging can show numerous gas locules in the embolized organ, and can
mimic an abscess.
Complications of embolization
Post-embolization syndrome usually occurs within the first day after embolization and
clinically presents with pain, cramping, fever, and nausea/vomiting, thought to be due to
release of endovascular inflammatory modulators by infarcted tissue. Treatment is NSAIDS,
opioids when appropriate, and IV fluids.
Non-target embolization is unintentional embolization of structures other than the target.
For instance, during uterine fibroid embolization there is a risk of non-target embolization of
the ovaries. During bronchial artery embolization, there is a risk of non-target embolization
to the brain causing stroke and to the spinal arteries causing paralysis.
IR: 595