Split cord malformation (continued)
Diastematomyelia: Coronal T2-weighted MRI (left image) shows CSF between the two hemicords (arrows) and
at thoracolumbar dextroscoliosis. Axial T2-weighted MRI (right image) shows two hemicords (arrows) within a
single CSF space.
Historical terminology for split cords is inconsistently applied.
Diastematomyelia, sometimes interchanged with split cord, refers to a sagittal bifurcation of the spinal
cord into left and right hemicords, each containing a single set of dorsal and ventral horns and nerve roots.
Diplomyelia is the presence of an accessory: spinal cord without roots, located dorsal or ventral to the
main cord. They are contained in a single dural sac.
Dimyelia (rare) is duplication of the spinal cord, with each cord having a complete set of roots. They are
separated into two dural sacs.
Bony/cartilaginous septa are well seen on imaging but fibrous septa may be too thin to
visualize on conventional imaging.
Splits are most commonly located caudally in the thoracolumbar cord.
Caudal regression syndrome
Caudal regression syndrome is a spectrum of structural defects (dysgenesis, hypogenesis,
or agenesis) of the sacrococcygeal and sometimes lumbar region involving the spine, spinal
cord, and often genitourinary or gastrointestinal tracts. The spinal cord conus medullaris
may terminate higher than normal or lower due to tethering.
Infants of diabetic mothers are at higher risk.
Tethered cord syndrome
Tethered cord syndrome is a clinical syndrome of neurologic deficits (e.g. back and leg pain,
gait spasticity, and decreased lower extremity sensation) attributed to ixation/traction of
the caudal portion of the spinal cord.
Common causes include spinal lipomas, tight filum terminale (thickened >2 mm), and post-
repair myelomeningocele.
Normally, the conus should terminate superior to the inferior endplate of L2. If the conus
terminates below this level, the cord may be tethered.
Spinal lipomas
Spinal lipomas have widely varying dasincatonyfeminoogw They are congenital, non-
neoplastic fatty lesions that occur along the dorsal midline spinal canal and are typically
intradural but can also have extradural components.
Spine: 874