Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) = constrictive bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis obliterans: Axial CT shows mosaic
perfusion with geographic regions of ground
glass attenuation.
This is an example in an adult; however, the
findings are similar in children.
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham
and Women's Hospital.
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) is the final common pathway of small airway
obstruction by inflammatory and fibrous tissue, which may be due to multiple etiologies.
BOS may be post-transplant in origin, post-infectious (typically following viral or atypical
bacterial pneumonia), or related to toxin or drug exposures.
BOS is one of the most clinically important complications of pediatric allogeneic lung and
bone marrow transplantation.
Chest radiographs are usually normal or may show mild hyperinflation.
CT demonstrates findings of small airways obstruction, including
Air trapping on expiratory views.
Mosaic perfusion.
Bronchiectasis and bronchial wall thickening.
Swyer.lames-Macleod syndrome is an acquired complication in up to 1/3 of young patients
with post-infectious BOS. Abnormal pulmonary development secondary to BOS leads to a
unilateral hyperlucent lung with volume loss.
The key radiographic feature is a small ipsilateral, hyperlucent lung with diminished vascular markings.
Note that wyer.ames-Macteod is not a sequela of viral bronchiolitis (of which RSV is the most
common cause), but is only seen after BOS, classically triggered by adenovirus infection or Mycoplasma
pneumonide.
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP) = bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP) is a disorder of the distal airways characterized by
filling of the bronchioles and alveoli with granulation tissue polyps. Bronchiolitis obliterans
organizing pneumonia (BOOP) is an older term for the same entity, and is often confused
with bronchiolitis obliterans which is a completely different disease.
The underlying histologic changes of COP are referred to as organizing pneumonia (OP). COP
is the clinical syndrome of OP of unknown cause. OP may be secondary to infection, drug
reaction, or inhalation. OP may also be a complication of stem cell transplant, but much less
commonly than BOS.
Radiographic features of COP/OP include multifocal migratory consolidations, ground glass
opacities, and nodules. The atoll or reverse halo sign is thought to be relatively specific for
OP and features a central lucency surrounded by ground glass.
Peds: 1103