CENTRAL VENOUS ACCESS
Central venous access can either be centrally inserted or peripherally inserted. There are
multiple different catheter options and determining factors include type of treatment,
duration, and frequency of infusions.
Common indications for central venous access include inability to obtain adequate
peripheral venous access, frequent blood draws, administration of substances that are not
safe to administer in peripheral veins (chemotherapy, vasopressors, TPN), hemodialysis, and
plasmapheresis.
The patient is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. The preferred vein of choice for
centrally inserted catheters is the internal jugular vein, but if occluded, other neck veins like
the external jugular vein can be used. Access is obtained under ultrasound guidance.
After placement, it is important to aspirate blood to confirm proper placement and to
subsequently flush the catheter with heparinized saline to prevent thrombosis.
Common complications include infection, accidental arterial puncture, bleeding, and
pneumothorax.
Nontunneled catheter
Nontunneled catheters are typically placed at bedside or in the ICU setting when the patient
is too unstable to travel and only local anesthesia is necessary.
Nontunneled catheters can have up to 5 lumens. Indications include the general indications
for a central venous catheter, need for rapid resuscitation and pressure monitoring.
Prolonged use (weeks to months) of a nontunneled catheter at the femoral, internal jugular,
or subclavian site should be avoided due to the increased risk of infection.
When no longer needed, these can be easily removed at bedside.
Tunneled catheter
Tunneled catheters are placed in the interventional radiology suite and require conscious
sedation.
The lifespan of a tunneled catheter is weeks to months, some are even used for years.
Common indications for tunneled catheters are administration of chemotherapy, TPN,
plasmapheresis, and hemodialysis.
Ongoing infection or positive blood cultures are contraindications for placement.
Subcutaneous lidocaine is infused along the expected course of the catheter. The catheter
cuff is typically placed 1 cm from the skin entry into the tunnel to facilitate easy removal.
Tunneled catheters can usually be removed at bedside. Care must be taken to ensure
complete removal of the cuff.
If there is concern of infection, submit the tip for culture after removal.
Subcutaneous port catheter
The lifespan of a port is months to years.
The preferred vessel of choice for the interventional radiologist is again the internal jugular
vein. However, surgeons typically use the subclavian vein.
Placement requires conscious sedation and antibiotic prophylaxis.
The pocket should be snug around the port SO that it does not flip. Some interventional
radiologists also suture the port in place.
A port catheter should only be accessed using a Huber needle to protect the integrity of the
silicone septum as a regular needle will remove a core of silicone with each puncture.
IR: 647