Caustic stricture / nasogastric tube stricture
Both caustic strictures and strictures secondary to nasogastric tube placement are typically
long, smooth, and narrow.
Strictures develop 1-3 months after the causative event.
Caustic strictures are associated with an increased risk of cancer with a long lag time of up
to 20 years after the initial insult. Caustic strictures are usually longer than peptic strictures.
Radiation stricture
Like caustic strictures, radiation strictures are long, smooth and narrow and occur in the
radiation field.
It generally requires more than 50 Gy of radiation to cause an esophageal stricture.
Acute radiation esophagitis occurs 1-4 weeks after radiation therapy. Radiation strictures
develop later, about 4-8 months after radiation.
Extrinsic compression from mediastinal adenopathy
Cross-sectional imaging with CT or MRI is best to evaluate if extrinsic compression is
suspected.
EVALUATION OF ESOPHAGEAL MASSES
Masses arising from the mucosa, submucosa, and extrinsic to the esophagus produce
characteristic effects on the esophagus, which are usually able to be seen on imaging.
Lesions arising from the mucosa create an acute angle relative to the adjacent wall, whereas
the submucosal lesions create an obtuse angle as demonstrated below.
mucosal
submucosal
extrinsic compression
BENIGN ESOPHAGEAL MASSES
Mesenchymal tumor
Benign mesenchymal tumors are the most common submucosal esophageal tumors
and include leiomyoma, lipoma, hemangioma, and others. Leiomyomas are the most
common. On a barium swallow, a mesenchymal tumor typically appears as smooth, round,
submucosal filling defect.
Compared to esophageal leiomyomas, esophageal gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are
rare and may be benign or malignant. In contrast, GISTS are more common than leiomyomas
in the stomach.
Adenoma
An esophageal adenoma is a benign mucosal lesion with malignant potential, usually arising
within Barrett's esophagus and appears as a filling defect (most <1.5 cm in size) with acute
margins on esophagram.
GI: 177