Malrotation and midgut volvulus
Malrotation with midgut volvulus: Abdominal radiograph (left image) shows a high bowel obstruction,
with dilated proximal bowel and absence of distal bowel gas. Upper GI (right image) of the same patient
demonstrates a duodeno-jejunal. junction to the right of midline (yellow arrow) and a corkscrew appearance of
the distal duodenum and proximal jejunum (red arrow).
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD and Carlo Buonomo, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
In normal embryologic
anterior
development, the bowel rotates
abdominal wall
270° counterclockwise around the midgut rotates
midgut
SMA, causing the characteristic
270" counterclockwise
Normal rotation of
retroperitoneal course of the
around. SMA
the midgut about
duodenum.
the SMA during
organogenesis.
This rotation fixes the duodeno-
aorta
jejunal junction in the left upper
physiologic
SMA
Normal bowel
rotation occurs
quadrant and the cecum in the left midgut
between the fifth
lower quadrant. The span between herniation
and eleventh
the two composes the mesenteric
weeks of
attachment of bowel; the longer
SMA: = superior
gestation.
the attachment, the less likely the mesenteric: artery
bowel is to pinwheel (volvulize)
around its axis.
Malrotation is the failure of normal rotation of the bowel during embryogenesis, which
predisposes to volvulus due to abnormal mesenteric fixation. Malrotation is associated with
omphaloceles and heterotaxy syndromes.
Volvulus is a surgical emergency, with a high mortality rate due to bowel ischemia. Volvulus
typically presents with neonatal bilious emesis.
Although bilious emesis may be due to several entities including non-obstructive gastroenteritis,
malrotation with volvulus must be ruled out with an upper GI.
Note, because bilious emesis can also occur from distal obstruction in neonates, it is essential to exclude a
distal obstruction with abdominal radiograph prior to performing an upper GI. Performing an upper GI in a
neonate with distal obstruction introduces a high risk of false positives given the laxity of the ligament of
Treitz and the distortion by dilated distal loops.
Peds: 1126