INFLAMMATORY SINONASAL DISEASE
Rhinosinusitis
Rhinosinusitis is inflammation of the paranasal sinuses and nasal mucosa. It is a clinical
diagnosis (based on symptoms such as purulent nasal drainage, nasal obstruction, facial
pressure, and hyposmia), with imaging reserved for suspected complications, surgical
planning, or suspected obstructing mass.
Acute rhinosinusitis lasts <4 weeks. The most common cause is viral, followed by bacterial
infection. See below for separate discussion of fungal disease.
Chronic rhinosinusitis lasts >12 consecutive weeks. Chronic sinusitis is probably related to
obstruction of sinonasal drainage pathways. The goal of functional endoscopic sinus surgery
(FESS) is to open/widen these pathways.
Systemic risk factors for rhinosinusitis include:
Mucociliary clearance defects: e.g., cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia.
Immunodehiciencies: e.g., common variable immune deficiency, ypogammagobulmem.s.
Small vessel vasculitides: granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) especially when there is bony
erosion and septal perforation, and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss)
especially when there is nasal polyposis.
Odontogenic sinusitis is the most common cause of unlateral/solated maxillary sinusitis.
The usual etiologies are a maxillary premolar or molar tooth with periapical abscess or, after
extraction, an oroantral fistula.
Coronal CT shows opacification
of the bilateral maxillary sinuses,
thought to present odontogenic
sinusitis, at least on the left. Note
dental caries (yellow arrow) involving
al left upper maxillary tooth and
associated periapical lucency (red
arrow) representing a periapical
abscess or granuloma.
Sinus mucosal thickening is a common but nonspecific imaging finding. Acute sinusitis is
more likely to feature an air-fluid level and bubbles within the fluid. Sclerotic thickening
of sinus walls, due to prolonged mucoperiosteal inflammation, is characteristic of chronic
sinusitis.
Neuro Head & Neck: 757