BENIGN BREAST DISEASE
CYCLICAL AND PROLIFERATIVE BREAST DISEASE
Fibrocystic change
Fibrocystic change is an essentially normal pattern of breast physiology.
Clinically, fibrocystic change presents as cyclical breast pain, sometimes with a palpable
lump. Fibrocystic change is almost always seen in pre-menopausal women.
Imaging findings are not specific and the diagnosis of fibrocystic change is never made based
on imaging alone. Its only significance is that it may cause certain imaging abnormalities that
instigate further workup, such as cysts and calcifications.
Sclerosing adenosis
Sclerosing adenosis is a benign proliferative lesion caused by lobular hyperplasia and
formation of fibrous tissue that distorts the glandular elements.
Similar to fibrocystic change, the imaging importance of sclerosing adenosis is that it can
mimic DCIS with microcalcifications.
INFECTIOUS AND INFLAMMATORY BREAST DISEASE
Mastitis
Mastitis is infection of the breast, most commonly by Staphylococcus aureus. It is typically
seen in nursing mothers (called lactational or puerperal mastitis) or in diabetic patients.
Clinically, mastitis presents with breast pain, induration, and erythema. Treatment is
antibiotics. If inadequately treated, mastitis can develop into a breast abscess.
Imaging is usually not performed, unless symptoms persist after antibiotics. Mammography
and ultrasound can show focal or diffuse skin thickening, breast edema, and adenopathy.
The primary differential in this setting is inflammatory carcinoma. A: skin punch biopsy can
be performed if the two entities cannot be differentiated clinically or on imaging.
Breast abscess
Targeted ultrasound in a lactating patient who
presented with breast pain, skin erythema, and
palpable lump concerning for abscess. Image
shows a heterogeneous collection containing
low level internal echoes and layering debris,
with surrounding inflammatory changes
including overlying skin thickening. Cultures
from subsequent aspiration grew S. auerus.
Al breast abscess is a walled-off purulent collection, most commonly subareolar in location.
Clinically, breast abscess presents with focal breast pain, erythema, fluctuance, and fever.
On mammography, breast abscess can appear as a mass, asymmetry, or architectural
distortion, with overlying skin thickening.
Ultrasound often shows an oval or irregular mass with complex cystic and solid echotexture,
indistinct margins and an echogenic halo. The periphery of the mass is often hypervascular.
Treatment is ultrasound-guided aspiration in addition to antibiotics.
Breast: 428