THYROID
RADIOTRACERS
lodine-131
I-131 emits both beta particles and 364 keV gamma photons (only the gamma photons are
used for imaging). The half-life is 8 days. I-131 is produced by fission in a nuclear reactor. It is
administered orally.
I-131 is ideal for therapy due to its high radiation dose to the thyroid and relatively low
whole body dose. Indications include treatment of thyroid cancer status post thyroidectomy,
and hyperthyroidism from Graves disease or multinodular goiter.
lodine-123
I-123 decays by electron capture and emits 159 keV gamma photons. The half-life is 13
hours. I-123 is expensive because it is produced by cyclotron. It is administered orally.
I-123 is the preferred radioisotope for thyroid imaging, as it can image in high detail and
obtain thyroid uptake values.
Tc-99m pertechnetate
Tc-99m emits 140 keV gamma photons, has a half-life of 6 hours, and is generatorproduced.
Unlike iodine, pertechnetate is trapped but not organified by the thyroid. After initial
uptake it is released into the blood pool. Thyroid uptake is not routinely quantified with
pertechnetate due to its rapid washout.
Pertechnetate is an excellent alternative to I-123 for thyroid imaging because of its ready
availability from generators, and its low patient dose which allows administration of higher
doses and thereby permits quicker imaging with less motion artifact. It is administered
intravenously.
Because pertechnetate does not specifically localize to the thyroid, high background counts
are typical. Only 1-5% of administered activity is taken up by the thyroid.
In contrast to I-123, the salivary glands are well seen with pertechnetate.
Tc-99m pertechnetate is preferred over I-123 when the patient has received recent
intravenous iodinated contrast (iodine in contrast blocks thyroid uptake of additional
iodine), when IV administration is necessary, or when a quick study is required.
Tc-99m pertechnetate (left image) versus
1-123 (right image) thyroid scans. Note,
pertechnetate has higher background counts
and physiologic uptake in salivary glands.
Patient preparation
Patients undergoing I-123 or I-131 maging/therapy must have non-suppressed TSH,
which can be achieved by stopping exogenous thyroid hormone for 4 weeks, or by two
intramuscular injections of recombinant TSH (rTSH).
Patients who received intravenous iodinated contrast should wait one month before
radioiodine imaging.
Nucs: 457