Acute cholecystitis (continued)
False positive HIDA (gallbladder nonvisualization without acute cholecystitis) can be due to:
Recent meal (within 4 hours) or prolonged fasting (greater
Pancreatitis.
than 24 hours).
Severe illness.
Administration of CCK immediately prior to the exam,
Chronic cholecystitis.
which can cause persistent sphincter of Oddi relaxation.
Cholanglocarcinoma of the cystic duct
Total parenteral nutrition.
(very rare).
False negative HIDA (gallbladder visualization with acute cholecystitis) is very rare and can
be due to:
Acalculous cholecystitis with a patent cystic duct.
Duodenal diverticulum simulating the gallbladder; however, a lateral view would differentiate.
Choledochal cyst simulating the gallbladder.
Right extrarenal pelvis in jaundiced patients with increased renal excretion of tracer.
Chronic cholecystitis
Chronic cholecystitis is long-standing gallbladder inflammation causing loss of normal
gallbladder function, predisposing to formation of stones.
Chronic cholecystitis may be a cause of chronic recurrent abdominal pain.
Diagnosis can be difficult as there is no single pattern that is pathognomonic of chronic
cholecystitis based on HIDA. In fact, most cases of chronic cholecystitis have a normal HIDA.
Al low gallbladder ejection fraction (GBEF) is thought to be suggestive of chronic
cholecystitis. To measure the ejection fraction, pre- and post-CCK injection gallbladder
counts are compared. A GBEF <35% suggests chronic cholecystitis, although the reliability of
this finding is controversial as ejection fraction is dependent on the rate of CCK injection and
standard infusion protocols have not been determined.
Biliary obstruction
Acute high-grade obstruction of the common bile duct can result in the liver scan sign,
where there is uptake in the liver but no visualization of the biliary tree or small bowel.
Intrahepatic cholestasis or hepatitis can have a similar appearance.
Delayed clearance of activity from the common bile duct suggests partial obstruction.
Hepatic dysfunction
Severe hepatic dysfunction in a patient with
cholangiocarcinoma:
Single image from a HIDA obtained 30 minutes after
6.1 mCi Tc-99m disofenin administered shows a large
amount of background and blood pool uptake with
minimal tracer in the liver. A large photopenic defect
in the left lobe of the liver (arrows) corresponds to
the patient's cholangiocarcinoma. There is small
bowel tracer excretion.
Since the IDA tracers are actively transported into hepatocytes and then secreted into
the bile, severe hepatic dysfunction will cause very poor hepatic uptake and blood pool
clearance will be delayed.
Since functioning hepatocytes are necessary to extract the tracer, a hepatic mass will appear
as a focal photopenic defect.
Nucs: 467