Ocular coloboma
Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows a
large right posterior globe outpouching,
representing a coloboma.
Colobomas are focal congenital defects (fissure, cleft, or outpouching) typically caused by
incomplete fusion of the embryonic choroidal/optic fissure, but the term can be applied to
defects in any structure in the eye and eyelid.
Colobomas are associated with numerous syndromes including trisomies 13 and 18 and
CHARGE syndrome (coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth and
development, genitourinary anomalies, and ear anomalies).
On imaging, posterior colobomas appear as a focal bulge elongating the globe in the region
of the optic disc. They are often associated with microphthalmia and a retrobulbar cyst.
Septo-optic dysplasia
Septo-optic dysplasia is part of the holoprosencephaly spectrum of malformations,
characterized by optic nerve hypoplasia, agenesis of the septum pellucidum, and often
ypothalamicptutary dysfunction.
On imaging, the bilateral optic nerves and optic chiasm are small and the septum pellucidum
is absent. The posterior pituitary may be ectopically located.
In septo-optic dysplasia plus, there is associated polymicrogyria and/or schizencephaly, a
full-thickness cleft in the cerebral hemisphere that creates a communication between the
ventricles and the extra-axial subarachnoid space.
OCULAR TRAUMA
Globe rupture and foreign body
Globe rupture, or open-globe injury, is usually diagnosed on clinical examination but CT can
be helpful in unclear cases or to exclude orbital foreign bodies.
CT features specific for globe rupture include flat tire sign of globe deformity (wall contour
irregularity and decreased globe volume), change in anterior chamber depth, intraocular
foreign body, or intraocular gas.
Increased depth of the anterior chamber suggests posterior segment rupture, while
decreased depth suggests anterior segment rupture (e.g., corneal perforation).
Nonacute mimics include globe outpouchings (coloboma, staphyloma), pthisis bulbi
(atrophic and calcified globe), focal ocular calcifications (optic nerve drusen, senile scleral
plaques), and scleral bands or intraocular gas/air placed to treat retinal detachment.
Neuro Head & Neck: 782