BRAIN TUMORS
APPROACH TO EVALUATION OF A FOCAL BRAIN MASS LESION
Are there any tumor-related complications?
CT is a good screening modality to identify potential surgical emergencies complicating a
brain tumor, most commonly the 3 H's: hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, and herniation.
Hemorrhage: Tumor neovascularity can be prone to nemorrhage.
The most common primary brain tumor to hemorrhage is glioblastoma.
The most common hemorrhagic metastases include melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, thyroid carcinoma,
and choriocarcinoma. Although breast and lung cancer metastases are less frequently hemorrhagic on
a case-by-case basis, these two malignancies are SO common that they should also be considered in the
differential of a hemorrhagic metastasis.
Hydrocephalus: Tumors can block the flow of CSF.
Tumors within or around the ventricular system, particularly in the posterior cranial fossa, cause
noncommunicating hydrocephalus.
Leptomeningeal metastases cause communicating hydrocephalus.
Herniation: A combination of the tumor and associated vasogenic edema can shift brain
tissue across dural reflections.
Supratentorial tumors cause subfalcine, downward transtentorial (uncal/central), and tonsillar herniation.
Infratentorial tumors cause upward transtentorial and tonsillar herniation.
Could this be a tumor mimic?
In the evaluation of any suspected intracranial tumor, non-neoplastic mass-like lesions
should also be considered, such as brain abscesses, subacute infarcts, tumefactive
demyelination, aneurysms, and developmental or degenerative mass/cystic lesions. These
conditions variably show mass effect and/or enhancement, mimicking a brain tumor.
How many lesions are there?
Most primary brain tumors and many brain metastases are solitary. Without a history of
cancer, solitary brain tumors in adults over 50 years old have about the same chance to be
metastasis or glioblastoma.
If there is more than one lesion, the diagnosis is most likely to be metastases, but
mutfoca/mutncentne glioblastoma or primary central nervous system lymphoma
are in the differential. Some genetic conditions result in multiple brain tumors (e.g.,
neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis).
Where is the lesion located?
First, determine if the lesion is intra-axial or extra-axial. Although metastases may be
either, the differential diagnosis for tumors in each intracranial compartment is otherwise
completely different.
The most common primary extra-axial tumor is meningioma.
The most common primary intra-axial tumor is glioma, especially glioblastoma in older
patients.
Neuro Brain: 704