Ground glass opacification (GGO)
Ground glass opacification:
Noncontrast CT shows diffuse
ground glass opacification (GGO).
The pulmonary architecture,
including vasculature and
bronchi, can be still seen,
which is characteristic for GGO.
Although these imaging findings
are nonspecific, this was a case
of acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS).
Ground glass opacification is histologically due to either partial filling of the alveoli
(by blood, pus, water, or cells), alveolar wall thickening, or reduced aeration of alveoli
(atelectasis).
Ground glass is usually a term reserved for CT. CT shows a hazy, gauze-like opacity, through
which pulmonary vessels are still visible.
Acute ground glass opacification has a similar differential to acute consolidation, since many
of the entities that initially cause partial airspace filling can progress to completely fill the
airspaces later in the disease. The differential of acute ground glass includes:
Pulmonary edema, which is usually central or dependent.
Pneumonia. Unlike consolidation, ground glass is more commonly seen in atypical pneumonia such as
viral or Pneumocystis, jiroveci pneumonia.
Pulmonary hemorrhage, seen as pure ground glass in acute phase, but subacute phase shows peripheral
sparing and crazy paving.
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Chronic ground glass opacification has a similar but broader differential diagnosis compared
to chronic consolidation. In addition to all of the entities which may cause chronic
consolidation, the differential diagnosis of chronic ground glass also includes:
Lung adenocarcinoma, which can be focal or multifocal.
Organizing pneumonia, typically presenting as rounded, peripheral opacities.
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, usually with an upper-lobe predominance.
Interstitial lung disease, including desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP), nonspecific interstitial
pneumonia (NSIP), and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP).
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is a type III hypersensitivity reaction to inhaled organic antigens. In
the subacute phase there is ground glass, centrilobular nodules, and mosaic attenuation.
Chest: 10