KIDNEYS
RENAL IMAGING PATTERNS
Sonographic appearance of kidneys
Grayscale ultrasound (US) is used to assess the renal parenchyma (masses, scarring,
calcification), to evaluate for stones, and to evaluate for hydronephrosis. The proximal ureter
can also be seen in some patients allowing for evaluation of proximal hydroureter.
Color Doppler can be used to evaluate the main renal arteries for pathology (renal artery
stenosis, aneurysms) or for donation evaluation. Evaluation of the main renal vein can
be conducted to assess for clots or tumor thrombus. Renal Doppler can also be used to
assess the smaller intra-parenchymal vessels and calculate the resistive index (non-specific,
suggests a number of entities including ureteral obstruction and intrinsic renal disease).
Contrast-enhanced US (CEUS): Contrast-enhanced ultrasound permits evaluation of
microvascular blood flow in real time, which is too small to detect by color Doppler. Among
other things, it can be used to detect subtle solid renal masses and better characterize
complex cystic masses. Of note, US contrast agents do not affect renal function and can be
useful in patients with CKD.
Sagittal grayscale ultrasound of a normal right
kidney. The renal cortex is normally isoechoic to
the hepatic parenchyma. Medullary pyramids
are seen as hypoechoic triangles bordering to
the renal sinus. The renal sinus is surrounded by
hyperechoic fat. The major and minor calyces are
usually not apparent unless hydronephrosis is
present.
Diffusely increased echogenicity
Echogenic kidneys are most commonly due to medical renal disease, such as diabetic
nephropathy, glomerulosclerosis, acute tubular necrosis, etc.
HIV nephropathy can cause bilateral enlarged and echogenic kidneys.
Focally increased echogenicity
Focal increase in echogenicity can be caused by renal lesions or areas containing fat,
calcium, and air.
Angiomyolipoma (AML). An echogenic renal mass is suggestive of AML (due to internal fat
content), particularly when isoechoic to the sinus fat.
Renal calculus.
Milk of calcium, caused by crystals precipitating out of supersaturated solution.
Sloughed papilla, secondary to papillary necrosis, may appear as an echogenic mass in the
collecting system (often calcified).
Intrarenal gas (e.g., infection, recent nephrostomy tube placement).
Malignant neoplasm (atypical appearance).
GU: 241