Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), previously called juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is a spectrum of related chronic inflammatory arthropathies
affecting children younger than 16 years of age.
Monoarticular or pauciarticular (most common) JIA may affect either a single joint or a few
joints including the knees, ankles, elbows, or wrists.
Polyarticular JIA is a systemic disease affecting multiple joints including the hands, feet, and
cervical spine in addition to the joints affected by mono/pauciarticular disease.
A variant of JIA is Still disease, which is a systemic disorder affecting children younger than
5, featuring acute febrile illness, rash, adenopathy, pericarditis, and mild arthralgias.
Radiographic hallmarks of JIA are abnormal bone length or morphology due to hyperemia
in a skeletally immature patient. Growth disturbances are more commonly seen in early-
onset disease. Abnormal morphology results from epiphyseal overgrowth and enlargement
(ballooning) of the ends of bone. Affected joints demonstrate premature skeletal maturation
and physeal fusion.
In the hand, premature fusion of the growth plate may cause brachydactyly (short fingers).
PA radiograph of the hand in a patient with juvenile idiopathic arthritis shows a shortened fifth metacarpal
(arrow).
In the knee, the characteristic appearance is a widened intercondylar notch, metaphyseal
flaring, and uniform joint space narrowing. This appearance can appear similar to
hemophilia.
In the elbow, there is characteristic enlargement of the radial head and trochlear notch, with
uniform cartilage space narrowing. These findings can also be seen in hemophilia.
In the hips, symmetrical cartilage space narrowing, protrusio deformity, and gracile
appearance of the femoral shaft are characteristic.
Ankylosis may occur in the wrist and zygapophyseal (facet) joints of the cervical spine.
Ankylosis occurs much more commonly in juvenile idiopathic arthropathy compared to adult
rheumatoid arthritis. The differential diagnosis of a child with cervical spine ankylosis is
Klippel-Feil syndrome, which is failure of cervical segmentation.
MSK: 932