Rathke cleft cyst
Rathke's cleft cyst: Axial FLAIR (left image) and coronal post-contrast T1-weighted MRI shows a FLAIR
hyperintense, T1 hypointense parasellar mass (yellow arrows). The mass demonstrates faint peripheral rim
enhancement. The pituitary is displaced to the right and the optic chiasm is displaced superiorly (red arrow).
Rathke cleft cyst is a remnant of the embryologic Rathke pouch lined with simple columnar
or cuboidal epithelium. They are typically intrasellar with or without suprasellar extension.
Rathke cleft cysts are typically seen in middle-aged adults, twice as commonly in females.
Rathke cleft cyst is reportedly very common in autopsy studies (up to 22% incidence), but
clinically is usually asymptomatic or discovered incidentally.
On imaging, Rathke cleft cyst is a nonenhancing cyst without calcification. An enhancing rim
may be seen related to the pituitary tissue wrapped around the cyst (claw sign). A small,
nonenhancing intracystic nodule, likely a clump of mucin, is pathognomonic.
The MR signal characteristics depend on the protein content of the cyst fluid. The intra-
cystic fluid may be isointense to CSF if low protein and hyperintense on T1-weighted images
if high protein. High protein content may cause incomplete nulling of the intracystic fluid on
FLAIR.
Empty sella
The (partially) empty sella is mostly filled with CSF and possibly slightly enlarged, due to
herniation of the subarachnoid space (sometimes known as intrasellar arachnoidocele). The
small pituitary gland is flattened against the floor of the sella.
The infundibulum sign, in which the pituitary stalk traverses this space, distinguishes empty
sella from true cystic intrasellar lesions.
Primary empty sella can be a normal variant, especially in older patients, related to
insufficiency of the diaphragma sellae, or be caused by intracranial hypertension.
Empty sella is one of a constellation of findings in idiopathic intracranial hypertension
(pseudotumor cerebri), which is a syndrome attributed to elevated CSF pressure in the
absence of intracranial mass or hydrocephalus.
Patients with idiopathic intracranial hypertension, who are typically female and obese, present with
headache, transient visual obscurations, and/or pulsatile tinnitus.
The main imaging findings are empty sella, paPlledema/posterior scleral flattening, optic nerve sheath
dilation, bilateral transverse sinus stenosis, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, and meningoceles of Meckel's cave
or petrous apex.
Secondary empty sella is related to prior pituitary disease. Gland shrinkage may reflect
sequela of treated pituitary tumors, pituitary apoplexy, Sheehan syndrome, or trauma.
Neuro Head & Neck: 799