Ewing sarcoma (continued)
Ewing sarcoma most commonly arises from the femoral diaphysis, followed by the flat bones
of the pelvis. Ewing may also develop in the tibia, humerus, and ribs.
The lung is the most common site of metastasis.
The characteristic radiographic appearance is a permeative lesion in the medullary cavity
with wide zone of transition and associated aggressive lamellated (onion-skinning) or
spiculated periosteal reaction.
Ewing often causes a soft tissue mass which can be difficult to see by radiography.
Osseous Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is abnormal proliferation of Langerhans cells with a
variety of clinical manifestations, ranging from an isolated lytic bony lesion to fulminant
systemic disease.
Langerhans cells are dendritic cells (histiocytes) that normally live in the epidermis and lymph nodes,
where they act as antigen-presenting cells.
istopathologically, Birbeck bodies are seen on electron microscopy within the histiocytes.
Clinical subtypes of LCH have varied presentations.
Eosinophilic granuloma (osseous LCH) features localized skeletal or pulmonary involvement. It may be
mono- or polyostotic. Despite the name, the involvement of eosinophils is variable. Pulmonary LCH is
discussed in the thoracic imaging section.
HandschdllerChrstian (multifocal, unisystem) is a clinical triad of pituitary hypophysitis (causing diabetes
insipidus), exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions (typically affecting the skull).
Letterer-Siwe (multifocal, multisystem) is a fulminant disease with multisystem involvement, primarily
seen in young infants and toddlers under age two. Prognosis is poor.
In clinical practice, the most important factor is thought to be determination of unifocal or multifocal
disease rather than the classification above.
The eosinophilic granuloma variant of LCH is
relatively common and may present clinically
with pain, tenderness, and fever, often
mimicking osteomyelitis. Children between
ages 5-15 are typically affected.
The appearance of the affected bone depends
on the bone involved:
Skull: Beveled edge or punched-out lytic lesion.
Flat bones (e.g., pelvis): Hole within a hole lytic
lesion.
Ribs: Multiple expansile lytic lesions.
Long bone (diaphysis most common, but may
occur anywhere including rarely the epiphysis):
Permeative destruction, with wide zone of
transition and later lytic lesion and faint rim of
sclerosis.
Spine: Complete vertebral body collapse (vertebra
plana), pictured to the right. The differential of
vertebra plana in a child also includes lymphoma,
chronic osteomyelitis, and OI.
Maxilla: Floating teeth.
Along with infection, eosinophilic granuloma
should be considered in the differential
diagnosis in any patient under 30 with a lytic Eosinophilic granuloma (osseous LCH) causing
lesion anywhere.
vertebra plana (complete collapse) of L2 (arrows).
Peds: 1178