WHOLE-BODY IMAGING OF NEOPLASM, INFECTION, AND INFLAMMATION
RADIOTRACERS
1-123 MIBG
I-123 MIBG is a norepinephrine analog that is taken up by
chromaffin cells of sympathetic adrenergic tissue. It is used
to image pheochromocytoma in adults and neuroblastoma
in children. To a lesser extent, MIBG is taken up by other
neuroendocrine tumors including carcinoid, medullary thyroid
carcinoma, and paraganglioma.
I-131 MIBG can be used to treat neuroblastoma in children.
Normal distribution is areas of sympathetic innervation,
including salivary glands, heart, thyroid (although this is typically
intentionally blocked with Lugol's solution to reduce thyroid
dosimetry), liver, kidney, and bladder.
Indium-111 pentetreotide (Octreoscan)
Indium-111 is yclotron-produced and decays by electron
capture, emitting two gamma photons at 173 and 247 keV. Its
half-life is 67 hours. Pentetreotide is octreotide conjugated to
DTPA which allows binding to In-111.
In-111 pentetreotide is used to detect tumors with somatostatin
receptors, including amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation Planar image shows normal
(APUD) tumors. Most common applications are evaluation of
distribution of I-123 MIBG.
carcinoid or islet cell tumors such as gastrinoma. However,
pentetreotide has low sensitivity for insulinoma.
Paragangliomas (extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas) are seen better with In-111
pentetreotide compared to MIBG, although In-111 pentetreotide is uncommonly used for
detection of paragangliomas.
Normal distribution is intense renal and splenic uptake, with slightly less hepatic uptake.
Indium-111 oxine leukocytes (WBCs)
The normal distribution of Indium-111 labeled WBCs is spleen > liver >> bone marrow.
Infection imaging with an In-111 WBC scan is performed at 24 hours.
The key advantage of In-111 oxine WBCs compared to gallium is the lack of physiologic
bowel accumulation, which allows evaluation of abdominal or bowel infection/
inflammation.
Disadvantages compared to gallium include a tedious labeling procedure, higher radiation
dose, and less accuracy in diagnosing spinal osteomyelitis.
Advantages of In-111 WBC scan compared to Tc-99m HMPAO include absence of interfering
bowel and renal activity, ability to perform delayed imaging, and ability to perform
simultaneous Tc-99m sulfur colloid or Tc-99m MDP bone scan. These combined approaches
are very helpful for evaluation of osteomyelitis in the setting of a baseline abnormal bone
scan (e.g., prosthesis evaluation), discussed below.
Nucs: 481