ACETABULAR FRACTURE
Acetabular fracture
Discontinuity of either the iliopectineal and ilioischial lines may represent a fracture of the
anterior or posterior column of the acetabulum.
Classification of acetabular fractures is complex and multiple classifications have been
introduced. The most widely used classification scheme is the Judet-Letournel classification,
which describes 10 types of acetabular fractures.
The Judet-Letournel classification describes 5 elementary patterns: fractures of the
posterior wall, posterior column, anterior wall, anterior column, and transverse fractures.
Five combination patterns are also described. The Judet-Letournel types are not related to
fracture complexity or prognosis.
The posterior wall of the acetabulum is the most commonly fractured element, alone or in
combination with other injuries.
HIP FRACTURE
Anatomy of the proximal femur
hip joint
Head
capsule
eater
Neck
ochante
&
-
profunda femoris artery
5cm
Illustrationb by
medial femoral
Luis Beltran, MD
circumflex artery
Illustration demonstrates the vascular anatomy of the
Cinematic rendering of the proximal femur with
proximal femur. The main blood supply to the femoral head the main regions of the proximal femur colored.
is from the medial femoral circumflex artery, a branch of The head and most of the neck (excluding the
the profunda femoris artery.
basicervical region) are intracapsular.
A "hip fracture" generally refers to a fracture of the proximal femur.
It is important to understand the vascular and osseous anatomy of the proximal femur in
order to accurately describe hip fractures in a way that is helpful to the orthopedist.
The blood supply to the femoral head is predominantly supplied by the medial femoral
circumflex artery, which arises from the profunda femoral artery. This artery courses
along the femoral neck, and if the extra-osseous branches are injured in trauma there is an
increased risk of avascular necrosis of the femoral head.
Intracapsular fractures, including those of the femoral head and most fractures of the
femoral neck, have increased risk for vascular disruption and therefore increased risk for
avascular necrosis, in comparison to extra-capsular fractures.
The femoral head and most of the femoral neck are intracapsular.
The basicervical region is the most distal part of the femoral neck, just proximal to the intertrochanteric
crest. The basicervical region is extra-capsular. Therefore, basicervical fractures generally do quite well
when appropriately recognized and treated.
MSK: 1033