Overview of esophageal imaging (continued)
Barium is the contrast agent of choice unless there is concern for an esophageal leak, in
that case water-soluble contrast is preferred. If the patient has a significant aspiration
risk, however, high osmolality water-soluble contrast should be avoided (due to risk of
pneumonitis).
If an esophageal malignancy has been diagnosed, PET/CT may be used to stage for
locoregional lymph nodes and metastatic disease, and endoscopic ultrasound is utilized for
evaluating the depth of the lesion (T stage) and the presence of local lymph nodes.
CT and MRI have a limited role in evaluation of primary esophageal pathology.
ESOPHAGEAL RINGS AND WEBS
Esophageal web
An esophageal web is a thin anterior infolding/indentation, usually occurring in the anterior
cervical esophagus, which is often asymptomatic but may be a cause of dysphagia if it
significantly narrows the lumen. There is a controversial association with anemia (Plummer-
Vinson syndrome) and carcinoma of the upper esophagus.
Schatzki ring
A Schatzki ring is a focal pathologic
narrowing of the B (mucosal) ring of the
distal esophagus less than 13 mm causing
intermittent dysphagia.
Asymptomatic narrowing of the B ring is referred
to as a lower esophageal ring.
The key imaging feature is focal, thin,
circumferential constriction near the GE
junction, almost always associated with
a hiatal hernia, best seen in the RAO/
prone position. An upper GI study is more
sensitive than endoscopy for diagnosis.
On an esophagram or an upper GI study, most
symptomatic rings do not allow passage of a 13
mm barium tablet.
The differential of circumferential
esophageal constriction includes:
Focal stricture.
Muscular esophageal ring above the GE
Schatzki ring: Double-contrast barium swallow in
junction (also known as an A ring).
a patient with dysphagia shows a circumferential
Esophageal cancer (associated with
narrowing (arrows) at the gastroesophageal junction,
irregular mucosal contour: and an apple-core
associated with a small hiatal hernia.
appearance).
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and
Esophageal web (rarely circumferential,
Women's Hospital.
usually in cervical esophagus).
GI: 174