Scleroderma
Scleroderma is a systemic collagen vascular disease caused by collagen deposition in the skin
and soft-tissues. The fingertips are affected first, with atrophy of the distal soft-tissues.
Acro-osteolysis (resorption of the distal portion of the distal phalanges) is characteristic,
especially if there is accompanying calcification.
Acro-osteolysis and soft tissue
calcification in a patient with
scleroderma. Frontal radiograph
of the hand (with the fingertips
magnified) shows acro-osteolysis
of the distal tuft (yellow arrow) and
-
soft tissue mineralizations in the
fingertips (red arrows).
Acro-osteolysis is not specific to scleroderma. The differential for acro-osteolysis includes:
Collagen vascular disease, including scleroderma and Raynaud's.
Neuropathy.
Polyvinyl chloride exposure.
Thermal injury (burn or frostbite). In frostbite the thumb is usually spared because it is clenched in a fist.
yperparathyroidism, seen in conjunction with subperiosteal reabsorption.
Hajdu-Cheney, a rare autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by short stature, craniofacial
changes, and progressive acro-osteolysis.
Psoriasis.
Pyknodysostosis.
Dystrophic soft-tissue and periarticular calcifications are common in scleroderma, which
causes tightening and fibrosis of the skin and often leads to joint contractures.
Frontal radiograph of the forearm in a patient with scleroderma shows extensive soft tissue
mineralizations along the ulnar aspect of the forearm and at the base of the thumb metacarpals (arrows).
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are idiopathic conditions characterized by inflammation
of muscle (polymyositis) or muscle and skin (dermatomyositis). Joint abnormalities are rare,
although periarticular osteopenia may be present in these conditions.
The imaging hallmark of polymyositis and dermatomyositis is soft-tissue calcification.
Intramuscular calcifications are most common, although subcutaneous calcifications may
also be seen, similar to scleroderma.
MSK: 922