Sinonasal and anterior skull base anatomy (continued)
The superior, middle, and inferior nasal turbinates/conchae are three paired bony
protuberances within the nasal cavity that form air passages inferior to each, called the
superior, middle, and inferior meatuses.
The inferior meatus is the drainage site of the nasolacrimal duct.
The ostiomeatal complex (OMC) or unit is the common pathway for the maxillary, frontal,
and anterior ethmoid sinuses to drain into the middle meatus. The OMC is a functional unit
comprising the maxillary sinus ostium, ethmoid infundibulum, uncinate process, ethmoid
bulla, hiatus semilunaris, and middle meatus.
The frontal sinus drains via the frontal recess either into the ethmoid infundibulum or
directly into the middle meatus. Some authors include the frontal recess in the OMC.
The maxillary sinus is the largest sinus and drains via the maxillary sinus ostium and
infundibulum, which if obstructed can cause isolated maxillary sinus disease.
The ethmoid sinuses or air cells are divided into anterior and posterior air cells by the basal
lamella of the middle turbinate where it attaches to the lamina papyracea.
The lamina papyracea is the thin part of the ethmoid bone separating the ethmoid air cells from the orbit.
The ethmoid labyrinth is covered superiorly by thei fovea ethmoidalis, an extension of the orbital part of
the frontal bone.
Between the orbital plates on either side are the cribriform plates, the horizontal portion of the ethmoid
bone that lies lower than the fovea ethmoidalis and supports the olfactory bulbs.
The sphenoethmoidal recess is the common pathway for the sphenoid sinus and posterior
ethmoid air cells to drain into the superior meatus.
The anterior skull base, which separates the anterior cranial fossa from the sinonasal tract
and orbits, is comprised of the orbital parts of the frontal bone, cribriform plates of the
ethmoid bone, and planum sphenoidale and lesser wings of the sphenoid bone.
Sinonasal anatomic variants
The variable depth of the olfactory fossa, which is bounded by the vertical and horizontal
lamella of the cribriform plate, is important due to the risk of penetration at this site during
endoscopic sinus surgery.
The agger nasi cell is an anteriormost ethmoid air cell located anterior to the frontal recess.
Al large agger nasi cell may narrow the frontal recess.
A: supraorbital cell is an anterior ethmoid cell that extends superior to the orbit and anterior
ethmoidal notch, which carries the anterior ethmoid artery. The presence of supraorbital
pneumatization places the artery at greater intraoperative risk.
AI Haller (infraorbital) cell is an ethmoid air cell located along the medial orbital floor, which
may narrow the maxillary ostium if large or inflamed.
A right-side Haller cell on axial and coronal CT (arrows).
Neuro Head & Neck: 755