INFLAMMATORY SPLENIC LESIONS
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown etiology characterized histologically by multiple
nodules composed of noncaseating granulomas.
When sarcoidosis involves the spleen, splenomegaly is the most common presenting finding,
often associated with hepatomegaly and ymphadenopathy.
Less commonly, sarcoidosis may involve the spleen in a multinodular pattern with numerous
hypoattenuating 1-3 cm lesions demonstrating essentially no enhancement.
These nodules are formed by coalescent sarcoid granulomas and have low signal on all MRI sequences.
Sarcoid nodules are most conspicuous on T2-weighted images and early-phase post-contrast T1-weighted
images. On the post-contrast images, the nonenhancing nodules will stand out against the avidly
enhancing splenic parenchyma.
maging appearance is generally indistinguishable from splenic lymphoma.
Inflammatory pseudotumor
Splenic inflammatory pseudotumor is a rare focal collection of immune cells and associated
inflammatory exudate of unclear etiology. Patients often have constitutional symptoms
including fever and malaise.
Inflammatory pseudotumor has a variable and nonspecific imaging appearance, but a typical
presentation is of a wel-circumscribed, heterogeneously enhancing mass.
SPLENIC INFECTION
Pyogenic abscess
Axial and coronal contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen demonstrates a heterogeneous gas-containing
fluid collection (arrows) within the medial spleen with irregular wall thickening and surrounding perisplenic
stranding. This was a case of Staph. aureus pyogenic splenic abscess that was subsequently drained
percutaneously.
Splenic bacterial abscesses are uncommon and usually seen in immunocompromised
patients. A solitary abscess is much more likely to be bacterial. In contrast, multifocal small
abscesses are more likely to be fungal.
On CT, a bacterial abscess usually has an irregular, enhancing wall. Gas is not usually seen
but is highly specific for a bacterial abscess when present.
A characteristic ultrasound finding is the wheel within a wheel or bull's-eye appearance,
which describes concentric hyperechoic and hypoechoic rings surrounding the abscess.
Treatment is CT- or ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage in addition to antibiotics.
GI: 167