BENIGN NON-CYSTIC SPLENIC LESIONS
If a mass is found in the spleen and the patient has no history of widespread malignancy or
symptoms referred to the left upper quadrant, the mass is most likely benign.
Hemangioma
Multiple splenic hemangiomas: T2-weighted (left image) and post-contrast T1-weighted (right image) MRI
shows multiple T2 hyperintense splenic lesions (arrows) that demonstrate subtle peripheral enhancement.
Hemangioma is the most common benign splenic neoplasm. They may be solitary or
multiple and they tend to be small.
Splenic hemangiomas are associated with Kasabach-Merrit: syndrome (anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and consumptive coagulopathy) and Kippel-frenaunsywever
syndrome (cutaneous hemangiomas, varicose veins, and extremity hypertrophy). These
visceral nemangiomatosis syndromes are usually associated with phleboliths.
On CT, hemangiomas are typically iso- or nypoattenuating pre-contrast and hyperennancing.
On MR, hemangiomas are typically hyperintense on T2-weighted images and may enhance
peripherally or homogeneously. However, the classic pattern of discontinuous nodular
enhancement seen in hepatic hemangiomas is uncommon.
Nuclear medicine scintigraphy with Tc-99m labeled red blood cells would show increased
activity within the lesion on delayed images. In contrast, Tc-99m sulfur colloid scanning may
show either increased or decreased activity.
Hamartoma
Splenic hamartoma: T2-weighted (left image) and arterial-phase enhanced T1-weighted (right image) MRI
shows a vague T2 isointense splenic mass (arrows) that enhances heterogeneously.
Splenic hamartoma is a rare, benign lesion composed of malformed red pulp elements. It
may be associated with tuberous sclerosis.
Splenic hamartoma is typically a wel-circumscripes, iso- or hypoattenuating mass on
unenhanced CT that enhances heterogeneously after contrast administration.
On MRI, a hamartoma is iso- to slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted images, featuring
heterogeneous early enhancement and relatively homogeneous delayed enhancement.
GI: 166