Budd-Chiari (continued)
Acute intraparenchymal findings include an edematous, mottled liver (nutmeg liver) with
sparing of the caudate lobe. As discussed above, the caudate is often spared as it drains
directly into the IVC. Flip-flop enhancement may be seen, with early central enhancement
and delayed peripheral enhancement.
Chronic findings are marked by progressive liver failure, with caudate lobe hypertrophy and
atrophy of peripheral liver with prominent regenerative nodules.
Veno-occlusive disease
Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) is destruction of small hepatic vessels secondary to toxin
exposure, with patent hepatic veins. VOD is often seen in patients after stem cell transplant
and exposure to certain chemotherapy agents.
Imaging findings are nonspecific. In the acute phase, periportal edema, narrowing of the
hepatic veins, hepatomegaly, neterogeneous hepatic enhancement, gallbladder wall edema
and ascites have been reported. Liver Doppler may show decreased velocity or reversal
of flow in the portal veins. In contrast to Budd-Chiari, the caudate lobe is not spared. The
findings in chronic disease are similar to those of cirrhosis.
Differential diagnosis in patients after stem cell transplant includes graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD). Veno-occlusive disease is more likely if the right hepatic vein diameter is <0.45 cm
while GVHD is more likely if there is associated small bowel wall thickening.
Peliosis hepatis
Peliosis hepatis is a rare benign disorder of sinusoidal dilatation and formation of blood-
filled lacunae.
It is often idiopathic but may occur due to certain medications (including steroids,
oral contraceptives, tamoxifen and methotrexate), immune disorders (including HIV,
immunosuppression post-transplant) and infections (including HIV, TB, Bartonella).
CT and MRI show early central enhancement with delayed centrifugal enhancement.
Ultrasound may show a non-specific hyperechoic mass.
Cardiac hepatopathy
Cardiac hepatopathy is passive hepatic congestion from cardiac surgery, heart failure,
constrictive pericarditis, or right-sided valvular disease, which may ultimately lead to
cirrhosis.
Imaging findings include enlarged hepatic veins and IVC, with reflux of intravenous contrast
from the right atrium into the IVC and hepatic veins. The liver is typically enlarged and
demonstrates mottled enhancement (nutmeg liver). Ascites is usually present.
GI: 122