Ventral abdominal wall
The midgut normally herniates through the ventral
anterior
abdominal wall in the first trimester. During this
abdominal wall
herniation, the midgut rotates 270 degrees around
the axis of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA).
midgut rotates
midgut
Physiologic midgut herniation is usually complete
270" counterclockwise
by 12-13 weeks. Therefore, a pathologic ventral
around: SMA
wall defect, such as omphalocele or gastroschisis, is
generally not diagnosed before 13 weeks.
aorta
It is common to see some fullness at the base of
physiologic
SMA
midgut
the umbilical cord before 13 weeks, which usually
herniation
represents physiologic midgut herniation. If the
fullness is especially prominent (27 mm) then it may
be prudent to bring the patient back for a follow-up
at 13 weeks to evaluate for a true ventral wall defect.
Normal early fetal anatomy (11-14 weeks)
At 11-14 weeks gestation, following structures should be assessed when possible: falx
cerebri, stomach, bladder, ventral abdominal wall, and the presence of four extremities.
SECOND AND THIRD TRIMESTERS
SECOND AND THIRD TRIMESTER MEASUREMENTS
Head measurements
The biparietal diameter (BPD) is
measured from the outer edge of
the skull closest to the transducer
to the inner edge of the skull
farthest from the transducer.
The plane of measurement is at
the level of the thalami and cavum
septum pellucidum. The skull should
be completely visualized all the way
around.
The corrected BPDi incorporates the
occipital frontal diameter (OFD) and a
correction factor.
The scanning plane for head measurements is at the level of
The occipital frontal diameter
the thalami (yellow arrows) and cavum septum pellucidum (red
arrows).
(OFD) is measured from the middle
of the frontal skull to the middle of The BPD (calipers marked 1) is measured from outer edge to
inner edge of calvarium.
the occipital skull.
The OFD (calipers marked 2) is measured from middle to middle
The measurement plane is the same edge of calvarium.
used to measure the BPD, at the level
of the thalami and cavum septum
Case courtesy Carol Benson, MD, Brigham and Women's
pellucidum.
Hospital.
Obstetrics: 339