MAMMOGRAPHY
SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY
The goal of screening mammography is to detect pre-clinical breast cancer in asymptomatic
women. Screening mammography detects 2 to 8 cancers per 1,000 women screened.
Mammography has decreased sensitivity in women with dense breasts.
Since 1990, the mortality from breast cancer has been steadily declining at a rate of
approximately 2.2% per year, thought to be due to improvements in adjuvant therapy and
screening mammography.
The current standard recommendation in the United States is annual screening
mammography beginning at age 40 for women at average risk for breast cancer, based
on guidelines issued by multiple national organizations including the American College of
Radiology (ACR) and Society of Breast Imaging (SBI).
In contrast, while the American Cancer Society (ASC) and the US Preventative Services Task
Force (USPSTF) agree that screening from age 40 reduces breast cancer mortality, both
organizations recommend beginning to screen at a later age due to uncertain benefits versus
risks in younger women.
The ACS (2015) recommends annual screening mammography between ages 45-54 and
biennial screening for age 55 or older. Women have the option to start annual screening at
ages 40-44.
The USPSTF (2009) recommends biennial mammography between ages 50-74. Decision to
start screening at ages 40-49 should be made on an individual basis.
The potential concerns for mammographic screening include a very small risk of inducing
breast cancer from radiation exposure, and risks of over diagnosis including anxiety from
false positives and unnecessary biopsies.
Randomized control trials have shown that screening mammography can significantly
reduce breast cancer mortality for women aged 40-74 by at least 20%.
Computer modeling of breast cancer screening also showed that the greatest reduction in
breast cancer specific mortality is achieved with screening mammography starting at age 40.
There are varying recommendations on the age to stop screening, as listed below.
Current guidelines for screening mammography
Starting Age Frequency Age to Stop
Comment
ACR
40 or older annual
continue as long as good health
ACS
45-54
annual
continue as long as good health option to start annual
55 or older biennial
and life expectancy 10+ years left screening at age 40
USPSTF 50-74
biennial
75
option to start at age 40
Breast: 375