CT correlation
Most modern PET studies are performed together with CT as a PET/CT. One important
exception is in the pediatric population, where PET may be performed in isolation to reduce
the risk of radiation exposure from CT.
The CT exam is often performed with a lower dose than a diagnostic-quality CT. The CT
protocol varies by institution (e.g., whether intravenous contrast is administered).
The CT is used for anatomic localization and attenuation correction.
Very dense retained oral contrast or dense metallic objects (such as joint prostheses) may
cause artifactual FDG uptake due to miscalculation of attenuation correction.
Patient preparation
The uptake of FDG in both normal and pathological tissues is dependent on the serum
glucose and insulin levels.
Elevated insulin levels will cause increased muscle uptake and decrease the sensitivity for
detecting mildly FDG-avid lesions.
Patients should be NPO for at least 4 hours to allow insulin to reach a basal level.
In type 1 diabetes, imaging should be performed in the morning after an overnight fast. Insulin is not
recommended.
In type 2 diabetes, regular insulin should be held 2-4 hours prior to the study. Short-acting insulin can
be used but is not recommended. There is no need to hold long-acting insulin and oral hypoglycemic
medications such as Metformin, though the latter can increase bowel uptake.
Blood glucose should be below 200 mg/dL, preferably below 150.
Elevated serum glucose will result in decreased FDG uptake by tumors and the brain.
The typical administered dose of F-18 FDG is 10-25 mCi. After intravenous injection, the
patient should rest in a quiet room for 60 minutes before imaging.
Ifthe patient talks, the vocal cords may show FDG uptake.
Ifthe patient walks, the muscles may show FDG uptake.
Normal FDG distribution
Brain: The brain has intense FDG uptake. Brains love sugar!
Despite intense uptake, with appropriate windowing, excellent detail of the cortex, basal ganglia, and
cerebellum can be seen.
Renal, ureters, and bladder: FDG is concentrated in the urine, with very intense activity in
the renal collecting system, ureters, and bladder. As a result, bladder is the critical organ
(the body part most susceptible to radiation damage from a given isotope). Good hydration
is recommended for clearance of radioactivity.
Salivary glands, tonsils, thyroid: Mild to moderate symmetric uptake.
Liver: Moderate, largely homogeneous uptake.
Bowel: Diffuse mild to moderate uptake is normal. Focal uptake within the bowel, however,
should be regarded with suspicion.
Metformin can increase colonic, and to a lesser extent, small bowel FDG uptake and may mask a lesion.
Heart: Uptake is often variable, depending on insulin/glucose levels and the patient's fasting
state. The heart prefers fatty acids but will use glucose in the postprandial state.
Muscles: FDG uptake is normally low. However, elevated insulin levels or recent exercise can
cause increased muscle uptake.
Brown fat: Brown fat is metabolically active adipose tissue that can be found in the
supraclavicular, axillary, mediastinal and paravertebral regions in adults that can be mildly to
moderately FDG avid, especially if the patient is cold or after food intake.
Nucs: 446