Meckel diverticulum
Meckel diverticulum is a remnant of the omphalomesenteric duct, which connects the fetal
ileum to the yolk sac via the umbilicus. Incomplete regression of the omphalomesenteric
duct leads to a spectrum of anomalies, ranging from an umbilico-ileal fistula (fecal drainage
from the umbilicus) to a Meckel diverticulum (by far the most common anomaly occurring in
approximately 95%). It is located at the antimesenteric aspect of the distal ileum.
umbilicoileal fistula
Meckel diverticulum
anterior
anterior
abdominal
abdominal
wall
ileum
wall
ileum
umbilicus
umbilicus
6
omphalomesenteric
Meckel border
duct
diverticulum
In young children, the most common manifestation is gastrointestinal bleeding (if it contains
ectopic gastric mucosa). Less commonly, a Meckel may cause intussusception by acting as a
lead point or result in diverticulitis mimicking appendicitis.
In adults, small bowel obstruction is the most common complication of a Meckel
diverticulum, followed by Meckel diverticulitis.
4
Meckel diverticulitis in an adult: Axial (left image) and coronal (right) noncontrast CT shows a blind-ending,
tubular structure (arrows) arising from the mid to distal ileum, with associated mild inflammatory change.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Although there are often exceptions, the "rule of 2s" states that Meckel diverticula are
2 inches long, 2 feet from the ileocecal valve, present in 2% of the population, become
symptomatic before age 2, and contain 2 ectopic tissues (gastric and pancreatic).
A Meckel diverticulum causing rectal bleeding can be diagnosed with a Tc-99m-
pertechnetate scan, which is only positive if the Meckel contains ectopic gastric mucosa.
Approximately 25% of Meckel contain ectopic gastric (less commonly pancreatic mucosa). On
pertechnetate scan, uptake kinetics of the ectopic mucosa is equal to gastric mucosa.
Crohn disease
Crohn disease may be a cause of bowel obstruction. Up to 30% of newly diagnosed Crohn
disease presents in the pediatric population.
Peds: 1137