Carcinoid (continued)
Gastrointestinal carcinoid is uncommon compared to other GI malignancies but is the most
common small bowel tumor. It typically occurs in the distal ileum.
Carcinoid usually arises as an intraluminal mass and may spread secondarily to the
mesentery either by direct extension or lymphatic spread. Up to 80% of carcinoids spread to
the mesentery.
A classic imaging appearance of mesenteric involvement is an enhancing soft-tissue mass
with radiating linear bands extending into the mesenteric fat. Calcification is common.
The radiating linear bands do not represent infiltrative tumor but are the result of an intense desmoplastic
reaction caused by the release of serotonin by the tumor.
Desmoid tumor
Desmoid tumori in a patient with Gardner's syndrome and status post proctocolectomy: Axial (left image) and
coronal (right) CT shows a heterogeneous, infiltrative mesenteric mass (arrows) with central cystic component,
consistent with a mesenteric desmoid. Note, no colon is seen on these images.
Desmoid tumor is a benign, but locally aggressive mass composed of proliferating fibrous tissue.
Desmoid may be sporadic or may arise in post-operative and postpartum patients, but
mesenteric desmoid tumors are more common in patients with Gardner syndrome (a
variant of familial adenomatous polyposis).
On CT, most desmoids are isoattenuating to muscle, but large tumors may show central
necrosis. A characteristic imaging feature is strands of tissue radiating into the adjacent
mesenteric fat, similar to mesenteric carcinoid and sclerosing mesenteritis.
Sclerosing mesenteritis
Sclerosing mesenteritis is a continuum of idiopathic disorders of the mesentery most
commonly of the small bowel that can be divided into the three following stages.
Mesenteric lipodystrophy is characterized by foamy macrophages replacing the mesenteric
fat. Imaging may show subtle increased attenuation of the mesentery.
Mesenteric panniculitis represents an infiltrate of immune cells that results in chronic
inflammation. Imaging shows increased attenuation of the mesentery, referred to as misty
mesentery, often associated with prominent mesenteric lymph nodes (K1 cm in short-axis).
The lymph nodes may have a halo of preserved fat in a background of diffuse fat stranding
referred to as a fat ring sign. Linear bands of soft tissue representing early fibrosis may be
present.
GI: 225