INFERIOR VENA CAVA (IVC) DISEASE
Inferior vena cava (IVC) filter placement
The purpose of an IVC filter is to reduce the risk of pulmonary embolism (PE) originating
from a lower extremity deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Indications for filter placement
include DVT and contraindication to anticoagulation; recurrent PE while anticoagulated; and
high risk of developing DVT/PE in a patient with contraindication to anticoagulation, such as
a multi-trauma patient.
The most common complication of IVC filter placement is access site thrombosis,
followed by IVC thrombosis. IVC perforation occurs not uncommonly, but is almost always
inconsequential. Filter fracture or embolization are rare.
The first step of the procedure is an inferior vena cavogram, performed with a high-flow
(pigtail) catheter. The cavogram guides the selection of filter type and placement location.
If a duplicated IVC is present, in order to prevent a clot from circumnavigating the filter,
either a single filter is placed above the IVC confluence or a filter is placed in each duplicated
IVC. If pre-procedural imaging is not available, a clue to the presence of a duplicated IVC on
initial cavography is the absence of iliac vein influx contralateral to the side injected.
Duplicated IVC: Pre-procedure contrast-enhanced
CT (left image) shows duplicated IVCS on either
side of the aorta (arrows). The presence of
duplicated IVCs is confirmed by cavography of the
left IVC (bottom left image), where the left renal
vein (arrow) drains into the left IVC.
Post-procedure radiograph (bottom right image)
shows the IVC filter (arrow at filter tip) placed
above the confluence of the duplicated IVC.
a
-
e
-
Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Most IVC filters are suitable for vessel diameters smaller than 28-30 mm. Only the special
Bird's Nest filter can be placed in larger IVCS up to 40 mm in diameter, however it is
pemmanemtmonretreabe. Alternatively, separate retrievable filters can be inserted in each
common iliac vein in the case of a megacava (IVC diameter >30 mm).
IR: 623