BI-RADS LEXICON FOR MRI MASSES
Overview of BI-RADS lexicon for MRI masses
The mammographic and MRI lexicons have several terms in common to describe mass
shape and margin. However, since MRI incorporates dynamic contrast enhancement, new
terminology was developed to describe a mass's internal pattern of enhancement.
A mass is defined as a space-occupying lesion that displaces normal breast parenchyma.
Mass shape
The MRI lexicon for mass shape is identical to that of mammography and ultrasound.
Round: Spherical in shape.
Oval: Elliptical or oblong in shape. May include two to three undulations in contour.
Irregular: Uneven shape. An irregular shape is suspicious for malignancy.
Mass margin
Evaluation of the margin of an enhancing mass is the MRI imaging feature most predictive
of malignancy. The BI-RADS MRI lexicon for mass margin includes circumscribed, irregular,
and spiculated. Unlike the mammography lexicon which uses the word irregular only to
describe mass shape, irregular is used in the MRI lexicon as a description of both mass
shape and mass margin. Circumscribed margins are more suggestive of benignity, while not
circumscribed (irregular or spiculated) margins are more suspicious for malignancy. A mass
with spiculated margins is thought to represent cancer 84-91% of the time.
The shape and margin of a mass are best evaluated in the early postcontrast sequences.
Progressive enhancement of the normal surrounding breast parenchyma on the subsequent
postcontrast sequences may obscure the true margins of a mass.
Internal enhancement
Several descriptive terms unique to breast MRI are used to describe the internal
enhancement pattern within a mass.
Homogeneous internal enhancement is uniform and can be seen in both benign and
malignant lesions.
Heterogeneous internal enhancement describes non-uniform enhancement within the
lesion and is suspicious, especially in the presence of rim enhancement.
Rim enhancement is a highly suspicious finding for cancer, representing malignancy in up
to 84% of cases, although this finding is only seen in 16% of cancers. Potential pitfalls are a
peripherally enhancing inflammatory cyst or fat necrosis, both of which can demonstrate
rim enhancement and are discussed later in the chapter.
Dark internal septations are highly specific for a benign fibroadenoma (>95% positive
predictive value). A fibroadenoma will also typically be circumscribed and hyperintense
on T2-weighted images. A hyalinizing fibroadenoma, typically seen in older women, rarely
enhances.
Breast: 406