Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) - WHO group 1, precapillary
The pathologic hallmark of primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is the plexiform lesion
in the wall of the muscular arteries, which is a focal disruption of the elastic lamina by an
obstructing plexus of endothelial channels.
PPH may be idiopathic (females > males) or familial (approximately 10% of cases).
On imaging, there is typically enlargement of the main pulmonary arteries with rapidly
tapering peripheral vessels.
Pulmonary hypertension due to left-to-right cardiac shunts - WHO group 1, precapillary
Congenital left-to-right cardiac shunts, such as ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal
defect (ASD), and partial anomalous pulmonary venous return, cause increased flow
through the pulmonary arterial bed. This chronically increased flow may eventually lead
to irreversible vasculopathy characterized by pulmonary hypertension and reversal of the
shunt, known as Eisenmenger syndrome.
Imaging of PAH secondary to a congenital shunt is similar to that of PPH. There is
enlargement of the central and main pulmonary arteries, with peripheral tapering. However,
radiologists should look for the presence of an intracardiac or extracardiac shunt in any
patient with unexplained pulmonary HTN.
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) and pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis (PCH) = WHO group 1, postcapillary
PAH secondary to PVOD is caused by fibrotic obliteration of the pulmonary veins and
venules. PVOD may be idiopathic but is associated with pregnancy, drugs (especially
bleomycin), and bone marrow transplant.
Imaging features interlobular septal thickening, patchy or centrilobular ground glass
opacities, pulmonary arterial enlargement, mosaic attenuation, and pleural effusions.
PCH is an entity that involves capillary proliferation leading to pulmonary hypertension in
children and young adults.
Pulmonary venous hypertension - WHO group 2, postcapillary
Left-sided cardiovascular disease leads to elevated pulmonary venous pressure, which is a
cause of pulmonary hypertension.
Most common etiologies are left ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction and valvular
disease.
Pulmonary hypertension associated with hypoxemic lung disease - WHO group 3, precapillary
COPD, sleep apnea, and interstitial lung disease can all lead to pulmonary hypertension.
Chronic hypoxic vasoconstriction is thought to invoke vascular remodeling leading to
hypertrophy of pulmonary arterial vascular smooth muscle and intimal thickening.
Chronic lung disease can further contribute to obliteration of pulmonary microvasculature
through emphysema and the perivascular fibrotic changes of pulmonary fibrosis.
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) - WHO group 4, precapillary
Chronic occlusion of the pulmonary arterial bed can lead to pulmonary arterial
hypertension, which is a complication affecting 1-5% of patients who develope acute
pulmonary embolism (PE). Of note, many patients with CTEPH never had previously
diagnosed acute PE.
V/Q scan or CT pulmonary angiogram are typically done as part of the workup for new
diagnosis of pulmonary HTN to rule out CTEPH.
Features of chronic PE are described previously. Mosaic attenuation is typical.
Treatment of CTEPH is surgical pulmonary hvompoendarterectomy or balloon pulmonary
angioplasty.
Chest: 52