PELVIC VESSELS
May-Thurner
May-Thurner: Axial contrast-enhanced CT (left image) shows a distended and hypoattenuating left common
iliac vein (yellow arrow), suggestive of thrombosis. Coronal CT (right image) shows the right common iliac
artery (red arrow) crossing the bifurcation of the IVC: and right common iliac vein (yellow arrow). The venous
thrombosis is not apparent on the coronal view.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
May-Thurner syndrome is a chronic
compression of the left common iliac
vein by crossing right common iliac
LEFT common iliac VEIN compressed by
artery against the lumbar vertebrae
RIGHT common iliac ARTERY
with or without deep venous
thrombosis.
Similar to other venous compression syndromes, intravascular volume status of the patient
should be taken into consideration.
Chronic compression leads to a fibrous adhesion in the vein, predisposing to thrombosis.
CT venography or MR venography can diagnose compression and associated deep vein
thrombosis.
Treatment is endovascular thrombolysis followed by stenting.
Varicocele
A varicocele is dilation of the pampiniform venous plexus. Primary varicocele (most
common) is due to absent or incompetent valves in the proximal gonadal vein causing
venous reflux. Primary varicoceles are a highly prevalent and treatable cause of infertility.
Secondary varicocele is due to a mass obstructing venous return.
The vast majority of varicoceles are left-sided as the left gonadal vein drains into the left
renal vein, while the right gonadal vein drains directly into the IVC. A solitary right varicocele
should prompt the workup for an obstructing retroperitoneal mass.
Scrotal ultrasound shows a dilated (>2 mm) venous plexus with a bag of worms appearance,
which worsens on Valsalva maneuver.
Treatment is coil embolization or surgical ligation of the gonadal vein, which have been
shown to be equivalent in outcome.
Pelvic congestion syndrome
Pelvic congestion syndrome is a potentially treatable cause of chronic abdominopelvic pain.
Etiologies include retrograde flow through incompetent valves of the ovarian veins or
venous obstruction.
Imaging shows dilated pelvic and ovarian veins that increase in caliber or reversed flow after
Valsalva.
Vascular: 573