Radiotracer: Tc-99m DTPA
Due to its short half-life (6 hours), Tc-99m DTPA is used for CSF studies that do not require
prolonged imaging, including the evaluation of CSF leak and shunt patency.
09
by
Normal cisternogram:
Planar images at different projections
were obtained at 4 hours following
0
intrathecal
of
ANTSKULDunsonscDass Phc1.9mm
.D--ANE
injection 0.54 mCi
In-111 DTPA. There is normal trident
appearance of tracer activity in the
sylvian and anterior interhemispheric
69
69
cisterns. Activity is also present in
the basilar cisterns and spinal canal.
0
RTLATDuration 600sec Pix1. 9mm
LTLATDuration.s 600sec Pbc1 9mm
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Radionuclide cisternography can be used to confirm suspected communicating
hydrocephalus in patients with the classic clinical triad of normal pressure hydrocephalus
(ataxia, incontinence, dementia), who would benefit from CSF shunting.
Communicating hydrocephalus is characterized by early entry of radioactivity into the lateral
ventricles within 6 hours, persistent intraventricular activity, and lack of activity over the
cerebral convexities after 24-48 hours.
CSF leak
Common locations for CSF leak are the ear, paranasal sinuses, and nose.
CSF leak can be identified by asymmetric activity in the region of the ears on frontal imaging,
or activity in the nose on lateral imaging. Subtle leaks can only be detected by placing cotton
pledgets in the area of concern, removing after several hours and counting the pledgets'
activity relative to plasma activity.
For spinal CSF leak, radioisotope cisternography shows diffusion of the tracer into the
paraspinal extra-arachnoidal space. Correlation with MR or CT myelography may show
triangular CSF space expansion at nerve root sleeves. A common pitfall is perineural cysts
which are discrete round lesions.
Evaluation of CSF shunt patency
Tc-99m DTPA or less commonly In-111 DTPA are injected into the shunt reservoir.
If the distal limb of the shunt is patent, radiotracer activity should rapidly pass through the
shunt catheter and into the peritoneal cavity or right atrium.
Manual occlusion of the distal limb should normally show reflux of radiotracer into the
ventricular system. This is not seen in the presence of proximal limb occlusion.
Nucs: 456