Calcium hydroxyapatite (continued)
Calcific tendinopathy of the longus colli muscle may cause neck pain, odynophagia, fever,
and prevertebral effusion, and may clinically mimic a prevertebral abscess.
L
€
Axial CT with contrast (bone window).
Sagittal CT with contrast (soft tissue window).
Calcific tendinopathy of longus colli: Axial CT shows globular and featureless mineralizations (arrow)
anterior to and to the left of the dens, within the left longus colli muscle. Sagittal CT just to the right
of midline shows a prevertebral fluid collection (red arrows). Please note that the sagittal image on
the right demonstrates how calcific tendinopathy of longus colli can mimic a prevertebral abscess
even on CT if the calcifications are not seen.
The vast majority of calcium hydroxyapatite is extra-articular. A very rare intra-articular
variant seen in the shoulder, called Milwaukee shoulder, leads to rapid destruction of the
rotator cuff and the glenohumeral joint.
Milwaukee shoulder is a destructive arthritis characterized by extensive full-thickness rotator cuff tears,
marked cartilage and bone destruction, and large bloody effusions. Similar to neuropathic arthropathy, the
bone destruction can have sharp margins with an atrophic appearance.
Frontal radiograph
Coronal STIR
Milwaukee shoulder (not pathologically confirmed): Frontal radiograph demonstrates destruction
of the medial humeral head and indistinct intra-articular mineralization in the axillary recess (yellow
arrow). Coronal STIR MRI shows sharply marginated destruction of the medial humeral head (red
arrow). There is extensive rotator cuff tearing, with globular morphology of the medially retracted
torn cuff tendons (blue arrow). There is al low signal intensity effusion with distension of the axillary
recess corresponding to the mineralization (yellow arrow).
A cervical spine MRI (not shown) was negative for syrinx or other explanation for potential
neuropathic arthropathy. Aspiration was, performed with a large amount of bloody, fluid aspirated
(not shown). In this case, intra-articular hydroxyapatite crystals were. not demonstrated on
pathologic analysis, but the imaging. features remain consistent with Milwaukee shoulder.
MSK: 928