Acute pancreatitis
-.
Acute pancreatitis on CT and ultrasound:
Contrast-enhanced axial CT (left image) demonstrates diffuse pancreatic enlargement and peripancreatic
edema. The pancreatic parenchyma enhances uniformly, without evidence for necrosis.
Transverse ultrasound (right image) of the head and body of the pancreas shows a diffusely enlarged,
heterogeneous pancreas (arrows) due to pancreatic edema.
Ultrasound case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston.
Acute pancreatitis is most commonly caused by alcohol use or an obstructing gallstone.
There are two morphologic subtypes:1. Interstitial edematous pancreatitis2. Necrotizing pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis can be classified either with the Balthazar grading system or by the CT
severity index.
Pancreatic and peripancreatic complications of pancreatitis:
<4 weeks
>4 weeks
Acute peripancreatici fluid collection:
Pseudocyst: Encapsulated fluid collection.
Non-encapsulated fluid collection.
A pancreatic pseudocyst is a collection of pancreatic
enzymes and fluid enclosed by a fibrous wall lacking
an epithelial lining. The fibrous wall usually takes
about 4-6 weeks to mature.
Acute necrotic collection: Non-encapsulated
Walled-off necrosis: Encapsulated heterogeneous,
collection containing heterogeneous material.
non-liquified collection with thick walls.
Any of the above collections may be sterile or infected. The presence of gas suggests
infection, but the absence of gas does not exclude infection.
Extra-pancreatic complications:
Perihilar renal inflammation, which may lead to venous compression or thrombosis.
Bowel involvement, may see ileus or even a fistula, often to the transverse colon or duodenum.
Secondary inflammation of adjacent vessels can cause vascular complications:
Pseudoaneurysm, due to erosion, most commonly of the splenic artery or gastroduodenal artery and may
result in hemorrhage.
Venous thrombosis, most commonly splenic vein thrombosis, which may lead to portal hypertension.
GI: 151