INNER EAR
Anatomy of the inner ear
The inner ear is situated within the petrous portion of the temporal bone and comprises
the otic capsule (also known as the bony labyrinth). The otic capsule is the osseous
superstructure containing the fluid-filled spaces of the cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular
canals. The otic capsule is the densest bone in the body.
The cochlea is a conical structure consisting of a bony two-and-a-half turn spiral canal,
including the basal, middle and apical turns, around a central core called the modiolus. The
modiolus contains the cells of the spiral ganglion and corresponds to the exit of the cochlear
nerve towards the internal auditory canal.
The spiral of the cochlea is separated by osseous spiral lamina and consists of the scala
tympani, scala media, and scala vestibuli.
The scala media, also known as the cochlear duct, separates the scala vestibuli and the
scala tympani, contains endolymph and the organ of Corti, the receptor organ for hearing
comprised of sensory epithelium containing numerous neuroepithelial hair cells, which send
electrical impulses to the spiral ganglia of the cochlea.
The scala tympani and scala vestibuli contain perilymph. They communicate at the apex of
the modiolus by a small opening, the helicotrema.
Hydraulic pressure created in the perilymph by the vibrations of the stapes against the oval window
ascends to the apex of the cochlea by the scala vestibuli. Pressure waves descend back to the basal turn
through the scala tympani. The vibrations from the scala tympani are transmitted through the round
window, where the energy is dissipated.
The cochlear aqueduct, also known as the cochlear canaliculus, extends from the scala
tympani to the subarachnoid space, opening on the inferior surface of the petrous portion
of the temporal bone. This theoretically allows for equilibration between the perilymphatic
space and the subarachnoid space.
The vestibule is an ovoid perilymphatic space which is continuous with the cochlea
anteriorly and the semicircular canals posteriorly, and contains the utricle and saccule, the
sense organs involved in balance. The semicircular canals are oriented orthogonal to one
another.
The vestibular aqueduct connects the crus commune (the common channel of the
superior and posterior semicircular canals) to the posterior cranial fossa and contains the
endolymphatic duct and sac.
The endolymphatic duct arises from the utricle and saccule and ends in a blind pouch, the
endolymphatic sac, at the posterior margin of the petrous ridge. The endolymphatic sac
acts as a reservoir for endolymph and the site for reabsorption into the epidural space.
Congenital anomalies
Congenital anomalies of the inner ear are divided into two broad categories: malformations
that involve only the membranous labyrinth and malformations that involve both the
osseous and membranous labyrinth (e.g., malformed otic capsules).
Several types of membranous labyrinth malformation have been described, the classification
of which is not useful radiologically as differentiation is made on histopathologic
examination.
Conversely, radiologic identification and characterization of malformations of both the
osseous and membranous labyrinth significantly impacts management strategy and
prognosis and will be discussed in more detail.
Neuro Head & Neck: 821