Pulmonary AVM (continued)
Coils must be used to embolize a pulmonary AVM. Particles are contraindicated as the right
to left shunt would cause brain emboli and infarction.
Most pulmonary AVMS have a single feeding artery and coiling of this inflow artery (via a
pulmonary arterial approach) is usually sufficient treatment.
Note that the treatment of peripheral (e.g., in a limb) AVM generally requires elimination of the entire
nidus, which is often fed from multiple arterial branches.
An asymptomatic lesion with a feeding artery size >3 mm or a symptomatic lesion (i.e., prior
infarct or brain abscess) are indications for treatment.
OBSTETRIC EMERGENCIES
Hemorrhage
Antepartum hemorrhage can be caused by placenta previa, placental abruption, and uterine
rupture. These are usually treated with urgent Caesarean section or hysterectomy. Role of IR
includes placing balloon catheters prior to going to the operating room, minimize blood loss,
control of hemorrhage, use cell saver capability.
Postpartum hemorrhage can be caused by uterine inversion, uterine atony, and genital tract
trauma. IR serves both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes by interrogating the internal
iliac arteries for the source of hemorrhage, often the uterine artery.
Pseudoaneurysm
Uterine artery pseudoaneurysms (UAPS) typically present several weeks after delivery. They
are usually diagnosed by ultrasound or CT prior to transcatheter arterial embolization.
Intervention includes bilateral internal iliac or uterine artery ligation. When other
treatments fail, hysterectomy is the last resort.
A
B
C
D
Postpartum uterine artery pseudoaneurysm:
DSA of internal iliac artery demonstrates focal contrast
pooling at the left uterine artery (yellow arrows) on
early arterial (A). and delayed (B) images. Selective UA
runoff shows active contrast extravasation on early
(C) and late (D) images. Coil embolization (blue arrow)
of the UA was performed, without residual contrast
extravasation (E). Case courtesy. Arjun Sharma, MD,
E
Brigham and Women's Hospital.
IR: 609