Calcaneal fracture
The calcaneus is the most commonly fractured tarsal bone.
Traumatic fractures of the calcaneus are typically the result of a high-impact injury, such as
a fall from height, in which case the fracture is known as the lover's fracture. In such cases,
there is a high association with other serious injuries including lumbar spine fractures,
traumatic aortic rupture, and renal vascular pedicle avulsion. If a traumatic calcaneal
fracture is identified, further imaging of the lumbar spine and/or abdomen is recommended.
Subtle fractures may not be directly visible; however, a decrease in the Boehler angle to less
than 20° is diagnostic of a calcaneal fracture.
superior aspect of
anterior process of
calcaneus
Boehler angle
normal is 20-40"
<20" is diagnostic of calcaneal fracture
4 -
posterior tuberosity
of calcaneus
superior aspect of
posterior subtalar facet
Thel Boehler angle is formed by drawing two lines:
superior aspect of posterior tuberosity of calcaneus and the superiora aspect of posterior subtalarf facet
superior aspect of anterior process of calcaneust to superior aspect of posterior subtalar articulars surface
A Boehler angle <20° is diagnostic of a calcaneal fracture.
A normal Boehler angle (20-40") does not exclude a calcaneal fracture.
The Essex-Lopresti classification divides calcaneal fractures into those sparing the subtalar
joint (25%) and fractures extending into the subtalar joint (75%).
The Sanders classification is based on the number of comminuted fragments at the
talonavicular joint, as seen on coronal CT.
Calcaneal stress fracture
Calcaneal stress fracture:
Sagittal STIR MRI demonstrates diffuse
edema of the calcaneus with a low
signal intensity fracture line (arrow)
posteriorly.
Note the typical orientation of the
fracture line perpendicular to the
calcaneal trabeculae.
A stress fracture of the calcaneus typically appears as a fluffy band of sclerosis within
the calcaneus, with an intact cortex. Boehler's angle is normal. The sclerosis tends to be
oriented perpendicular to the calcaneal trabeculae.
MSK: 1001