PERIOSTEAL REACTION IN AN INFANT OR CHILD
The periosteum is a thin membrane covering the entire surface of the bone excluding those
areas covered by cartilage. It contributes to bone production and remodeling. Irritation
of the periosteum, which can be due to trauma, infection, inflammation, neoplasm, or
metabolic disturbance, can cause, periosteal reaction.
The terms periosteal reaction," "periostitis," and "periosteal new bone formation" are
commonly used as synonyms. Periosteal reaction is simply a nonspecific response to injury
or chronic stress resulting in periosteal new bone production.
Periosteal reaction may also be associated with tumors or infection, typically producing an
aggressive appearance in these disorders. The morphology of aggressive periosteal reaction
is discussed in the musculoskeletal imaging section.
Physiologic subperiosteal new bone formation in a newborn
Physiologic periosteal reaction occurs in infants
1-4 months old, thought to be due to rapid bone
growth and loosely adherent periosteum.
The periosteal reaction is smooth and thin,
and usually only involves the lateral or medial
diaphysis of the long bones symmetrically.
Prostaglandin therapy
Neonates on prostaglandin therapy for congenital
heart disease (to maintain ductal patency) may
have periosteal reaction. Prostaglandins are
thought to decrease osteoclast bone resorption.
Infectious
Subperiosteal spread of pyogenic infection
elevates the periosteum and irritates it, usually
causing an aggressive periosteal reaction.
Congenital syphilis causes periosteal reaction.
Neoplastic (typically these are aggressive periosteal reactions)
Multiple malignancies, including leukemia,
neuroblastoma, Ewing sarcoma, and
osteosarcoma can produce an aggressive
periosteal reaction.
Trauma
Healing fractures (both accidental trauma and
child abuse) may cause periosteal reaction.
Metabolic
Rickets, scurvy (which is also characterized by
epiphyseal sclerosis -1 the Wimberger rim sign),
and hypervitaminosis A may all cause periosteal
reaction.
Syndromic
Multiple syndromes may cause periostitis. Caffey
disease (infantile cortical hyperostosis) is a rare
Symmetric periosteal reaction along the
inflammatory disease causing periostitis of the
femoral diaphysis (arrows). This child was on
prostaglandin therapy for congenital heart
mandible, scapula, and clavicle.
disease.
Peds: 1181