Malignant: Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma represents a heterogeneous group of malignant tumors where the neoplastic
cells are derived form osteoid lineage and most subtypes produce an osteoid matrix.
Osteosarcoma can be primary or secondary. Secondary osteosarcoma may arise from Paget
disease or after radiation. Secondary osteosarcoma in Paget disease is extremely aggressive.
General imaging hallmarks of osteosarcoma are bony destruction, production of
osteoid matrix, aggressive periosteal reaction, and an associated soft-tissue mass. Early
osteosarcoma may be only evident as subtle sclerosis.
There are more than 10 primary subtypes. The 4 most important subtypes are conventional
(most common), telangiectatic, and the two juxtacortical subtypes including parosteal
(pronounced PAR-ostea!) and periosteal (pronounced PERI-osteal).
Conventional intramedullary) osteosarcoma represents 75% of osteosarcomas and occurs
in adolescents/young adults usually about the knee in the metaphysis of the femur or tibia.
Conventional osteosarcoma features an intramedullary osteoid matrix, both intramedullary and cortical
bone destruction, aggressive periosteal reaction (sunburst or Codman), and a soft-tissue mass.
Radiograph
Post-contrast T1-weighted MRI T2-weighted MRI with fat supp.
with fat suppression.
Conventional osteosarcoma with classic radiographic appearance: Frontal radiograph of the femur in a
skeletally immature patient shows a heterogeneous mass in the distal femoral metaphysis with aggressive
sunburst periosteal reaction and cloud-like osteoid matrix (yellow arrows). Coronal MR images show a
heterogeneously T2 hyperintense mass with soft tissue extension and extensive enhancing periosteal
reaction.
Radiograph
T1-weighted MRI
T2-weighted MRI with fat supp.
Conventional osteosarcoma, subtle on radiography: Radiograph (left image) shows a region of subtle
sclerosis in the medial proximal tibial metaphysis (arrow). No periosteal reaction is apparent, which is
unusual for osteosarcoma. T1-weighted MRI shows a well-defined region of marrow replacement by
tumor (red arrows). T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression demonstrates diffuse marrow edema in the
tibia, with a region of decreased T2 signal (arrow) likely corresponding to the sclerosis seen on radiograph.
MSK: 940