ROUND OR OVAL SOLID MASSES
Fibroadenoma
Two different patients with fibroadenomas: On the left is an ultrasound image demonstrating the typical
appearance of a fibroadenoma in a young woman, as a circumscribed, oval, parallel, hypoechoic mass with
mild posterior enhancement.
On the right is the characteristic mammographic appearance of a hyalinized fibroadenoma in an older woman
(top right), as a circumscribed mass with coarse "popcorn-like" calcifications. This appearance is completely
diagnostic and no further workup is necessary. Ultrasound (below right) was performed as this lesion was
palpable, as evident by the triangular skin marker on the mammogram. Note the calcifications within the mass
(arrows).
Fibroadenoma is a benign neoplasm common in young women under age 35 and is the most
frequent cause of a palpable breast mass in this age group.
Clinically, a fibroadenoma will present as a firm, mobile mass.
The classic mammographic appearance of a fibroadenoma is an oval, equal density
circumscribed mass, although this imaging appearance is nonspecific. A hyalinizing
fibroadenoma, typically seen in older women, has a definitively benign mammographic
appearance containing coarse - popcorn-like" calcification.
The typical ultrasound appearance of a fibroadenoma is an oval, circumscribed mass
with homogeneous hypoechoic echotexture. Occasionally, a histologically benign
fibroadenoma may have more suspicious features on ultrasound including irregular margins,
heterogeneous internal echotexture, or shadowing, prompting biopsy in these cases.
On MRI, fibroadenoma typically appears as an oval, circumscribed mass with iso- or
hyperintense T2 signal and persistent (type I) enhancement. Dark internal septations are
specific for fibroadenoma.
Masses presenting with imaging features typical of a fibroadenoma are often either followed
(BI-RADS 3) or biopsied (BI-RADS 4), depending on the imaging characteristics and clinical
context.
If the following ultrasound features are met, the presumed fibroadenoma can be classified
as BI-RADS 3, with a false negative rate of 0.5%:
Ovoid shape, parallel orientation with a width to height ratio of >1.4 wider-than-tall).
All margins circumscribed.
Not highly hypoechoic.
Variants of fibroadenoma include juvenile fibroadenoma and giant fibroadenoma.
Aj juvenile fibroadenoma is seen in adolescents and is characterized by very rapid growth.
A giant fibroadenoma is a fibroadenoma greater than 8 cm in size.
Fibroadenoma may appear identical to a phyllodes tumor, especially when larger.
Breast: 417