PEDIATRIC GASTROINTINTESTINAL
GI EMERGENCIES
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC)
NEC with pneumatosis: Abdominal radiograph
NEC with portal venous gas: Abdominal radiograph
demonstrates bubbly lucencies within the bowel wall in a different neonate shows very faint curvilinear
(yellow arrows), most prominent in the right lower
lucencies projecting over the liver (red arrows),
quadrant, representing pneumatosis.
representing portal venous gas.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of
Children's Hospital.
Virginia Health System.
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) most commonly affects pre-term infants, thought to be
caused by a combination of infection and ischemia related to feeding. NEC may also occur
in term infants with congenital heart disease, Hirschsprung disease, an umbilical venous
catheter or on immunosuppression. Mortality can be as high as 40%.
NEC most commonly involves the distal ileum and right colon. Initial radiographic findings
include bowel thickening and fixed distention of a loop of bowel over serial exams.
Later in the disease, pneumatosis, portal venous gas, or pneumopertoneum related to
bowel perforation may be present.
Pneumoperitoneum can be difficult to detect on supine radiographs. One should always draw an
imaginary line across the liver from right to left - if the liver gets darker, then pneumoperitoneum should
be considered. Additional lateral decubitus or cross-table lateral radiographs can be obtained for further
evaluation.
Signs of pneumopertoneum include the football sign (air outlining the falciform ligament), Rigler's sign
(air outlining the serosal and mucosal surface of the bowel) and the telltale triangle (lucent triangle
outlined by bowel and the peritoneal reflection).
Submucosal pneumatosis, in which punctate locules of gas are trapped between the undulated mucosa, is
easily confused with intraluminal contents. Subserosal pneumatosis, a linear crescent of gas between the
smooth muscular and serosal layers of the bowel, is more specific.
Early NEC can be treated medically (antibiotics, TPN, and cessation of oral feeding). If
pneumopertoneum is present, emergent surgery is generally required; however, bowel-
sparing percutaneous drainage is an emerging option in some cases.
Once the baby recovers, contrast enema can evaluate for stricture, which is the most
common delayed complication of NEC.
Peds: 1124