Venous arm anatomy
brachiocephalic
The superficial veins arise from
vein
the dorsal venous arch on the
subclavian vein
dorsum of the hand and drain
into the cephalic and basilic
veins.
The cephalic vein drains the
radial (lateral) side and connects
axillary vein
with the subclavian vein.
The basilic vein drains the ulnar
brachial veins (deep)
(medial) side and connects with
the brachial or axillary vein.
The deep venous drainage
is via the ulnar and radial
cephalic
basilic vein
veins that course closely with
vein
corresponding arteries, and
merge at the antecubital fossa
to form the brachial vein.
median antebrachial vein
The brachial vein is renamed
the axillary vein at the axilla.
THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROMES (TOS)
Overview of thoracic outlet syndromes
Thoracic outlet syndromes (TOS) are a controversial spectrum of disorders caused by
compression of either the brachial plexus, subclavian artery, or subclavian vein, clinically
presenting with upper extremity paresthesias, pain, numbness, and/or coolness.
There are three common sites of compression:
1) The interscalene triangle is the space bounded by the anterior scalene muscle, the middle scalene
muscle, and the first rib. The brachial plexus and subclavian artery pass through the interscalene triangle.
2) Costoclavicular space is the space between the clavicle, first rib and subclavius muscle. The subclavian
vein compression is common at this site.
3) Subpectoral space is the space between the pectoralis minor and coracoid process. Subclavian artery
compression is common at this site.
The neurogenic form of TOS is the most common manifestation, due to mechanical
compression of the brachial plexus. Compression of the vascular structures is known as
vascular TOS. In this section we will focus on vascular TOS.
Dynamic imaging either with a CTA or MRA is key in the diagnosis of vascular TOS. Imaging
acquisition should be done arms up hyperabduction) and arms down (neutral) position
with two injections of the contrast. For each position arterial and venous images should be
acquired.
Neurogenic TOS
The neurogenic form of thoracic outlet syndrome is the most common manifestation, due to
mechanical compression of the brachial plexus.
Injury to the upper brachial plexus, C5 and C6, results in paralysis of the shoulder muscles
and biceps. Injury to the lower brachial plexus C7 and below results in forearm and hand
paralysis.
Vascular: 576