ARTHRITIS
The hallmark of arthritis is cartilage destruction, which may be evident on radiographs as
joint space narrowing.
In broad categories, arthritis can be divided into degenerative (osteoarthritis), inflammatory
(rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthropathes, and juvenile idiopathic arthritis), crystal
deposition (gout, calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate, and hydroxyapatite), hematologic
(hemophilia), and metabolic categories.
OSTEOARTHRITIS (OA)
Overview of osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the result of articular cartilage breakdown from altered local
mechanical factors in a susceptible individual. In addition to cartilage, OA involves the entire
joint including bone, ligaments, menisci, joint capsule, synovium, and musculature.
OA is the most common cause of cartilage loss in the middle-aged and older population.
OA typically occurs in weight-bearing joints and the hands in a specific distribution.
When OA is present in younger patients or in unusual locations, such as the shoulder, elbow,
or ankle, then there is usually prior trauma or other underlying arthritis.
Imaging findings of osteoarthritis:
Radiograph and CTfindings
MRI findings
Osteophytes.
Osteophytes.
Subchondral cystic change, due to herniation of
Subchondral cystic change.
joint fluid into bone through a cartilage defect.
Subchondral edema, due to inflammatory and
Sclerosis of subchondral bone, due to reactive
reactive changes.
remodeling.
Synovitis, with thickened, irregular, and
Lack of periarticular osteopenia.
hyperenhancing synovium.
Although joint space narrowing is present in all arthritides, osteoarthritis can be diagnosed
with confidence when subchondral sclerosis, osteophytes, and subchondral cystic changes
are present, erosions are absent, and periarticular osteopenia is absent.
Osteoarthritis in the hand
Similar to osteoarthritis of other joints, the radiographic
hallmarks of OA in the hand include cartilage space
narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, and osteophytosis.
Erosions are absent.
In order of decreasing involvement, sites of OA in the
hand include the distal interphalangeal joints (DIPS),
the first carpometacarpal joint (CMC), and the proximal
interphalangeal joints (PIPs).
Unlike rheumatoid arthritis, the metacarpophalangea joints
(MCPs) are less commonly affected.
Large osteophytes cause characteristic soft-tissue swelling
surrounding the finger joints.
A Heberden node is soft-tissue swelling around the DIP.
A Bouchard node is soft-tissue swelling around the PIP.
MSK: 910