Imaging findings of tubal ectopic pregnancy
ovary
Adnexal ectopic: Sagittal grayscale endovaginal ultrasound of the uterus (left image) shows a normal uterus,
with no evidence of intrauterine pregnancy- Ultrasound of the adnexa (right image) shows an adnexal ring
(yellow arrows), discrete from the normal ovary. In a patient with a suspected ectopic, the presence of an
adnexal ring and no intrauterine pregnancy has a 95% positive predictive value of being an ectopic pregnancy.
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Tubal ectopic pregnancy can have the following imaging appearances:1. Absence of an IUP.2. Extrauterine gestational sac separate from the ovary which can present as a tubal ring or adnexal ring.
The presence of yolk sac, embryo, and cardiac activity is variable.3. Ill-defined, inhomogeneous adnexal mass separate from the ovary.4. Pelvic free fluid only.
In the absence of an IUP, an extrauterine gestational sac and tubal/adnexal ring have high
positive predictive values for ectopic pregnancy (>95%).
An extrauterine gestational sac with yolk sac or embryo (with or without heartbeat) has a
100% positive predictive value of being an ectopic.
The nonspecific ring offire sign describes increased peripheral color Doppler flow
surrounding an adnexal mass. This sign is rarely helpful as it can be seen in both ectopic
pregnancy and corpus luteum.
In a rule-out ectopic patient, an ovarian mass is almost always a corpus luteum rather than
an ectopic pregnancy unless a definite embryo or yolk sac is identified. In contrast, an extra-
ovarian mass is highly concerning for an ectopic. When an adnexal mass is seen, it is helpful
to gently apply pressure with the ultrasound probe and assess for movement of the mass
separate from the ovary to identify its true location.
Following serial hCG
intrauterine pregnancy:
ectopic pregnancy:
spontaneous abortion:
B-hCG rises exponentially
B-hCG plateaus
B-hCG falls
The pattern of B-hCG levels over time may be a helpful adjunct to imaging in following-up
the rule-out ectopic patient.
Obstetrics: 330