Paraganglioma/pheochromocylomo
Cardiac paraganglomas are usually benign, however, these tumors can have malignant
potential. "Malignancy" is defined by WHO when there is distant metastasis. Common
locations include in and around the left atrium, retroaortic, and aorticopulmonary window.
Imaging features are identical to paraganglomaspneochromocytomas elsewhere in body,
including hyperenhancement due to high vascularity and T2 hyperintense signal relative to
myocardium.
Biopsy-proven paraganglioma: Axial CTA and T2-weighted MR images show a large mass centered at the right
atrium, which invades the right atrial wall, obliterates the adjacent epicardial fat, and extends into the left
atrium. The mass demonstrates heterogeneous enhancement (left image) and T2 hyperintense signal (right
image).
MALIGNANT PRIMARY CARDIAC TUMORS
Sarcomas represent the most common type of malignant primary cardiac tumors, followed
by primary cardiac lymphoma which is rare compared to secondary lymphoma involving the
heart.
Common imaging features of malignant cardiac tumors include involvement of more than
one cardiac chamber, intralesional necrosis, invasion of the pericardium and epicardial fat,
extension to extracardiac structures, hemorrhagic pericardial effusion, and metastases.
Primary cardiac sarcomas in adults include osteosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, synovial
sarcoma, liposarcoma, intimal (spindle cell) and undifferentiated sarcoma.
Intimal sarcoma is a relatively new WHO classification and refers to sarcomas of the aorta
and pulmonary artery/vein that express the MDM2 gene.
Apart from intimal sarcoma, the other sarcomas listed above have a predilection for the left
atrium, unlike angiosarcoma.
Angiosarcoma
. Angiosarcoma is the most common primary cardiac malignancy in adults.
Right side of the heart is typically affected, most often the right atrium.
On MRI, angiosarcoma may have a caulflower-like" heterogeneous appearance with
intralesional hemorrhage, necrosis, and T1 and T2 hypointense foci which represent vascular
channels.
Cardiac: 537