Ultrasound-guided cyst aspiration
The technique for ultrasound-guided cyst aspiration is similar to that of a core needle biopsy.
Instead of employing a spring-loaded biopsy gun, a standard syringe is attached to a 20- or
18-gauge needle and the targeted cyst is aspirated.
The cyst aspirate should be sent for cytology if bloody or clear. Benign-appearing aspirate,
which may be green, grey, yellow, or cloudy, may be discarded. Note that only benign-
appearing cysts should be aspirated. A complex cystic and solid mass should be biopsied
with a core device (with the solid component targeted).
Mommogrophieguided stereotactic core biopsy
Stereotactic biopsy of calcifications:
Paired 15 oblique pre-fire images (top images) show
the targeted calcifications (arrows) with appropriate
position of the biopsy device.
Specimen radiograph confirms that the targeted
-
M
calcifications are present within the specimen (arrow).
(i
Stereotactic guidance using 2D mammography is used most commonly to biopsy
calcifications. Less commonly, a stereotactic approach can be used to sample a
mammographic finding seen only in one view or a mammographic mass or architectural
distortion not seen on ultrasound.
Stereotactic biopsy tables can be prone or seated upright. The advantage of a prone table
is elimination of risk from vasovagal syncope. The seated stereotactic apparatus is less
expensive and may offer greater patient comfort. The breast is immobilized in compression
during the entire procedure.
Contraindications to stereotactic biopsy include a thin breast measuring <3 cm compressed
(although petite needles are available to sample lesions in breasts as thin as 22 mm), far
posterior or subareolar location, inability to be positioned on the stereotactic table, and
uncontrolled coagulation abnormality.
Paired stereo spot views of the target are obtained 15° to each side (30' apart) relative to
the needle path. Once targeting is confirmed by the radiologist, the actual needle path in
three-dimensional space is calculated by computer.
Breast: 440