Metastasis
Scirrhous breast cancer metastasis: Coronal (left image) and axial CT through the orbits demonstrates ill-
defined soft tissue in the left orbit (arrows), with loss of the normal definition of the optic nerve-sheath
complex, medial rectus, and inferior rectus. Despite the presence of the mass, there is no significant proptosis.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Orbital metastases arrive hematogenously and can form a mass or diffuse infiltrate in any
compartment. Common sites are the choroid, bones, fat, and extraocular muscles.
In adults, the primary tumors are typically carcinomas and most commonly from the breast.
Scirrhous breast cancer metastases characteristically can cause enophthalmos, whereas
other primaries cause proptosis.
In young children, the most common source of metastases to the orbit is neuroblastoma. On
cross-sectional imaging, these appear as an extraconal mass centered in the orbital lateral
wall or roof with permeative bony destruction, calcifications, and aggressive periosteal
reaction.
Patients with orbital neuroblastoma metastases present with periorbital ecchymoses (raccoon eyes).
lodine-123 MIBG scintigraphy is the preferred study to detect bone metastases of neuroblastoma.
ExTRACONAL MASSES
Dermoid cyst
Dermoid cysts are congenital ectodermal inclusion cysts made of keratinous and sebaceous
debris. In the extracranial head and neck, the orbital region is the most common site of
dermoids.
Orbital dermoid cysts are the most common extraconal mass in children. They occur near
suture lines, most commonly in the superolateral quadrant at the zygomaticofrontal suture.
Imaging shows a circumscribed, unilocular cyst with at most thin rim enhancement,
sometimes causing irregular bone scalloping. The internal contents can be heterogeneous
but a fatty component or fat-fluid level, when present, is characteristic.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common extraocular orbital malignancy in children.
Orbital rhabdomyosarcomas are predominantly the embryonal subtype, which tend to arise
in the superior orbital soft tissues.
Most orbital habdomyosarcomas are extraconal in location, but up to half have intraconal
extension as well.
Imaging shows a solitary, circumscribed, enhancing soft tissue mass.
Isolated orbital involvement carries a favorable prognosis relative to parameningeal sites.
Bone invasion and extraorbital extension classifies the tumor as parameningeal.
Neuro Head & Neck: 776