Laryngeal SCC (continued)
Treatment of supraglottic SCC can vary from laser epiglottectomy, various types of supraglottic
laryngectomy to total aryngectomy. Involvement of several key structures guides surgical management
including the laryngeal ventricle, thyroid cartilaginous invasion, posterior cricoid, or anterior commissure
invasion, involvement of bilateral arytenoid cartilage, which are contraindications to supraglottic
laryngectomy.
Other areas which have relevance in staging include the paraglottic space, the inner cortex of the thyroid
cartilage, involvement of the prevertebral space, encasement of the carotid artery or involvement of
mediastinal structures.
Local spread to the paraglottic spread is particularly relevant in supraglottic tumors.
Staging of glottic SCC is also dependent on vocal cord mobility, cartilaginous involvement,
and extension to relevant structures described above.
Patients with SCC of the glottis present early because of voice changes.
Key consideration for staging glottic SCC is evaluation for contralateral involvement, since this precludes
sparing of the contralateral side as well as the degree of vertical involvement.
Transglottic tumors, which cross the laryngeal ventricle to involve both the false and true vocal cords,
portend a worse prognosis.
Subglottic SCC constitutes less than 5% of laryngeal carcinomas. These lesions can be
difficult to identify endoscopically given obscuration from apposed true cords. Staging is
similar to the supraglottic and glottic types described above. Prognosis for subglottic lesions
is poor as they present at a much more extensive stage.
Laryngeal hemangiomas
Laryngeal hemangiomas occur most commonly in the subglottic larynx in infants. These are
frequently associated with cutaneous lesions. They frequently regress in infants, however
given risk of airway compromise can be treated with laser therapy.
Laryngeal hemangiomas in adults are very rare, with only case reports in the literature.
These do not regress spontaneously and are surgically treated.
Laryngeal trauma
Blunt trauma to the neck may compress
the larynx against the cervical spine,
with injury to the posterior soft tissues
due to the sandwich effect.
Fractures of the thyroid and cricoid
cartilage may be difficult to detect
in young patients with incomplete
Thyroid cartilage fracture: CT in bone windows shows a
ossification.
minimally displaced fracture of the thyroid cartilage (arrow).
latrogenic trauma from intubation can Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye
and Ear Infirmary.
cause arytenoid cartilage dislocation.
OTHER MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS OF THE MUCOSAL SPACES
Lymphoma
Lymphoma can arise from the adenoids of the nasopharynx. Most frequently this is non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma and affects a younger population.
Sarcomas
Any type of sarcoma can be found in the larynx, including synovial sarcomas,
chondrosarcomas, nabdomyosarcomas, and liposarcomas. Chondrosarcomas are generally
centered in either the cricoid or thyroid cartilage and have characteristic popcorn-like
calcifications that are best seen on CT.
Neuro Head & Neck: 844