Hepatic adenoma (continued)
Adenomas have a relatively high risk of hemorrhage, which is often the presenting
symptom. For this reason, incidentally discovered adenomas >5 cm are usually resected.
Adenomas are supplied by the hepatic artery and thus tend to be hypervascular on arterial
phase. Some subtypes (inflammatory) may demonstrate intralesional fat which on MRI will
demonstrate T1 hyperintensity and signal loss on out-of-phase images. Adenomas may
be difficult to differentiate from other hypervascular liver lesions in the absence of fat or
hemorrhage.
As stated above, each subtype has slightly different imaging features, making confident
imaging diagnosis somewhat difficult and often requiring tissue sampling for confirmation.
Adenomas are typically circumscribed masses with arterial hyperenhancement, becoming iso- or hypo-
to liver on portal venous and delayed phase imaging. They may appear heterogeneous due to fat or
hemorrhagic content. A1 fibrous pseudocapsule may be present, which tends to enhance late.
There are no specific ultrasound features to distinguish an adenoma from other hepatic
masses. An adenoma may be hyperechoic, isoechoic, or hypoechoic relative to normal liver.
Nuclear medicine is not usually helpful to differentiate adenoma from other liver masses.
Adenomas are usually photopenic on Tc-99m sulfur colloid scintigraphy (in contrast to FNH),
but not always. There is usually lack of uptake on a HIDA scan due to the absence of biliary
ductules.
Other fat-containing hepatic lesions
In addition to adenomas, other at-containing lesions in the liver include lipoma (very rare),
angiomyolpoma, and pseudolipoma of the Glisson's capsule.
Biliary ystudenoma/tystodenocarcinoma
Biliary cystadenoma is a benign cystic mass lined with biliary-type epithelium.
Although benign, most are surgically resected since malignant transformation to
ystadenocarcinoma may occur.
These typically appear as a multiseptated cystic mass on all imaging modalities.
Cystadenoma and ystadenocarcinoma are not easily differentiated on imaging.
Mural nodules should be regarded with suspicion for malignant transformation to
ystadenocarcinoma.
This is further discussed under "Biliary Neoplasia" later in the chapter.
ENHANCEMENT PATTERNS OF COMMON HEPATIC MASSES
Arterial phase
Portal venous phase Delayed phase
HCC
T
*
V
FNH
T
iso
iso
Hepatic adenoma
1
-
-
Hypervascular
T or iso
y or iso- or iso
metastasis
Non-hypervascular -
-
y
metastasis
GI: 115