SHOULDER BURSAE/RECESSES
The subacromial and subdeltoid bursae
subacromial bursa
normally communicate with each other.
This combined subacromialsubdetoid subdeltoid
bursa
bursa is not normally in communication
with the glenohumeral joint.
conjoined
Fluid injected into the glenohumeral
humerus
rotator cuff
joint that extends into the subacromial/
glenoid
subdeltoid bursa is seen with a
complete rotator cuff tear. A gap in
the rotator cuff will almost always be
glenohumeral joint
evident.
The subcoracoid bursa is located between the subscapularis muscle and the coracoid
process, whereas the subscapular bursa is located between the anterior surface of the
scapula and the subscapularis muscle
The axillary pouch has a U-shaped appearance banded by the inferior glenohumeral
ligament.
CORACOACROMIAL ARCH AND IMPINGEMENT SYNDROME
sagittal schematic ofthe coracoacromidl arch
anterior
posterior
clavicle
acromion
coracoacromial ligament
subacromial bursa
biceps tendon
infraspinatus
coracoid
supraspinatus
teres minor
subscapularis
Impingement syndrome is a clinical diagnosis that can have a variety of causes and MRI
findings. Shoulder impingement was originally described as chronic compression/tritation
of the structures that pass through the coracoacromial arch, including the supraspinatus
tendon, biceps tendon, and subacromial bursa.
Rotator cuff tears are often associated with chronic impingement, although there is
controversy whether the cuff tears are a result of chronic mechanical impingement or
whether degeneration leads to cuff tears, resulting in impingement syndrome.
Extrinsic impingement is caused by structural abnormalities external to the joint and is
divided into primary and subcoracoid impingement.
Primary external impingement is common and is due to a variation in the anatomy of the coracoacromial
arch (e.g., subacromial enthesophyte, hooked acromion, ACj joint osteophytes, OS acromiale, or thickened
coracoacromial ligament). Primary external impingement is typically seen in young athletes involved
with throwing or repetitive overhead movement. Chronic primary external impingement may cause
the supraspinatus tendon and/or the proximal aspect of the long head of the biceps tendon to become
degenerated, partially torn, or even completely torn. The subacromial bursa, immediately inferior to the
acromion, may become inflamed, leading to subacromialsubdetoid bursitis.
Subcoracoid impingement is less common and occurs when the coracohumeral distance narrows.
MSK: 1046