Dementia imaging (continued)
Lewy body dementia appears similar to Alzheimer but also involves the occipital lobes.
Multi-infarct dementia shows multiple asymmetric foci of decreased metabolism/perfusion.
Pick disease frontotemporal dementia) is characterized by decreased uptake in the frontal
lobes and anterior portion of the temporal lobes.
Huntington disease shows decreased uptake in the basal ganglia.
Parkinson disease is characterized by decreased dopamine transporter density in the
striatum on SPECT and PET, demonstrated with use of agents such as I-123 ioflupane
(DaTscan) or F-18-DOPA.
Normal versus abnormal I-123 ioflupane uptake on SPECT and SPECT/CT overlay: The left two images show
normal symmetric comma-shaped activity in the caudate nucleus and putamen. The right two images show
asymmetric and reduced activity in both striata, greater on the left, resulting in loss of the comma shape.
Seizure imaging
In general, blood perfusion and metabolism of seizure foci are increased during seizure (ictal
imaging), and decreased between seizures (interictal imaging).
Ictal perfusion SPECT with Tc-99m HMPAO or ECD is the most sensitive, but technically
challenging to perform because the radiotracer must be injected during the seizure or within
30 seconds after the end of the seizure.
Interictal PET with F-18 FDG is very sensitive in localizing partial complex seizures, which
usually originate in the temporal lobe. Ictal PET is not possible due to slow FDG uptake.
Extratemporal seizure focus is more difficult to localize. Ictal SPECT is the most sensitive.
Crossed cerebellar diaschisis
Crossed cerebellar diaschisis is a commonly encountered phenomenon in the presence of a
supratentorial lesion (seen in tumors, stroke, and trauma), where the cerebellar hemisphere
contralateral to the lesion shows decreased radiotracer uptake. This phenomenon is thought
to be due to interruption of cortcopontine-cerebelar pathways.
Axial F-18 FDG PET (right image) shows
near absent glucose metabolism in the
left cerebral hemisphere due to known
encephalomalacia. Relatively decreased
FDG uptake in the right cerebellum
(left image) is consistent with crossed
cerebellar diaschisis.
Nucs: 454