Fibrous tumor of the pleura (FTP)
Fibrous tumor of the pleura (FTP), also known as solitary fibrous tumor, is a focal pleural
mass not related to asbestos or mesothelioma. It is not mesothelial in origin.
Approximately 20-30% of FTP are malignant, SO all are excised. Malignant potential is
determined by number of mitoses seen at pathology.
FTP may be associated with hypoglycemia or hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy,
although these associated conditions are uncommon (5%).
FTP may be pedunculated. A pleural-based mass that changes position is suggestive of FTP.
FTP tends to have low FDG uptake on PET.
Fibrous tumor of the pleura: CT topogram (left image) shows a round opacity (arrow) with a circumscribed
medial margin and indistinct lateral margin, suggesting a pleural-based mass. CT confirms that the mass
(arrow) is pleural-based, with a broad attachment to the pleura.
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
PLEURAL EFFUSION
Transudate
A transudative effusion is caused by systemic or local imbalances in hydrostatic and oncotic
forces. Common causes include systemic low-protein states, heart failure, and nephrotic
syndrome.
Exudate
An exudative effusion is distinguished from a transudate by thoracentesis. There are no
reliable imaging features to distinguish between transudative and exudative effusions.
The presence of an exudate implies pleural disease causing increased permeability of pleural
capillaries, which may be due to:
Pneumonia with parapneumonic effusion, empyema, or tuberculous pleuritis.
Mesothelioma or pleural metastasis.
Rheumatoid arthritis or other collagen vascular diseases.
Chylothorax
A chylothorax is a pleural effusion consisting of intestinal lymph, most commonly caused by
atrogenic injury, less commonly neoplastic obstruction of the thoracic duct. Chylothorax is
also associated with ymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM).
The thoracic duct originates at the cisterna chyli in the upper abdomen and drains into the
left brachiocephalic or subclavian vein.
Chest: 94