ANEURYSMAL DISEASE
Aneurysms are considered when an artery is 1.5 times the size of the normal vessel.
A true aneurysm involves all three layers of the arterial wall: Intima, media and adventitia.
A pseudoaneurysm contains only one to two layers of the vessel wall and occurs in the
setting of trauma, malignancy or infection.
Aneurysms can vary with respect to size and growth, and management decisions should be
based on the risk of rupture.
Aortic aneurysmal disease
Minimally invasive endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is a widely accepted alternative to
surgical repair, with decreased perioperative morbidity and mortality.
A comprehensive review of aortic aneurysmal disease and the 5 types of endoleaks is listed
in the "Vascular" chapter. Interventional radiology is best suited for treating the following
types of endoleaks:
Type I endoleaks result from failure of the stent graft to form an adequate seal at the
proximal (type IA) or distal (type IB) attachment sites.
Prompt intervention is indicated and management consists of balloon angioplasty at the attachment sites
to attempt to approximate the stent graft with the vessel wall, deploying another expandable bare metal
stent over the attachment sites, or embolization.
Type II endoleaks are the most common type and result from retrograde filling of the
excluded aneurysm sac by branch vessels, typically the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and
lumbar arteries.
Many have slow flow and tend to spontaneously thrombose, resulting in no change or even decrease in
size of the aneurysm sac.
While there is risk for retrograde flow to increase sac size, the majority of aneurysms will decrease or stay
the same, thus management is controversial and is considered when there is persistent endoleak or the
sac enlarges by greater than 5 mm.
Management consists of accessing the sac either by transarterial approach or direct sac puncture, and
subsequent embolization of the feeding vessel.
Type III endoleaks are uncommon and result from loss of device integrity.
Prompt management is indicated and consists of deploying a new stent graft over the defect, with
subsequent angioplasty to obtain a good seal.
IR: 614