Pregnancy and breastfeeding
All thyrotropic agents cross the placenta and I-131 is contraindicated in pregnancy. Fetal
iodine is taken up beginning at 12 weeks of gestation.- A breastfeeding mother who requires an I-131 ablative dose must stop breastteeding
permanently for the current child.
For I-123, breastfeeding can be resumed two to three days after administration.
For TC-99m, breastfeeding can be resumed 12-24 hours after administration.
DIAGNOSTIC INDICATIONS (I-123 OR TC-99M PERTECHNETATE)
Ectopic thyroid
Either I-123 or Tc-99m can be used to localize suspected ectopic thyroid tissue.
Lingual thyroid is ectopic thyroid tissue at the base of the tongue.
Functional thyroid tissue may rarely be seen in an ovarian teratoma (struma ovarii).
Retrosternal thyroid tissue is most often due to a substernal goiter.
Thyroid nodule
Thyroid nodules are typically only imaged if the cytology is indeterminate.
ypertunctioning nodules are almost always benign adenomas.
Cold nodules have approximately 20% risk of malignancy, although the most common cold
nodule (-70-75%) is a benign colloid cyst.
A warm nodule usually represents a cold nodule with overlapping thyroid tissue.
A warm nodule requires further investigation such as biopsy if oblique views are indeterminate.
A discordant thyroid nodule is "hot" on Tc-99m and "cold" on I-123 as it has maintained the
ability to trap pertechnetate but is unable to organify iodine. Biopsy is usually recommended
as a discordant nodule may be malignant.
Graves disease
Graves disease on I-123 scan with 0.3 mCi I-123 Nal
administered.
There is diffuse uptake throughout the thyroid gland.
At faint pyramidal lobe is present (arrow).
24-hour uptake is elevated at 56%.
Graves disease is an autoimmune disorder characterized by hyperthyroidism, thyromegaly,
homogeneously increased thyroid activity, and often a prominent pyramidal lobe.
Both 6-hour and 24-hour iodine uptake are elevated.
Normal 6-hour uptake is 6-18% and normal 24-hour uptake is 10-30%.
Although usually an I-123 and a Tc-99m scan can be differentiated by the presence of
salivary uptake with Tc-99m, in Graves disease this distinction is often not possible. In Graves
disease, thyroid uptake can be SO strong that the salivary glands are often not seen, causing
a similar appearance with either radiotracer.
Nucs: 458