Atrial septal defect (ASD; continued)
Initially, the right atrium enlarges, followed by right ventricular enlargement (which may be
visible on the lateral radiograph as an opacity in the retrosternal clear space). In late-stage
disease, the pulmonary artery also becomes enlarged.
Shunt vascularity is usually present on radiography by the time the lesion is symptomatic.
Treatment is ASD closure, typically with an Amplatzer or similar device.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is
typically diagnosed earlier than ASD,
with many children presenting after the
first month of life as pulmonary vascular
resistance falls. A VSD may occur in
the membranous (70%) or muscular
VSD
interventricular septum.
VSD primarily causes dilation oft the left
heart. Left-to-right shunting occurs in
systole, causing volume overload of the
left heart and resulting in left atrial and
left ventricular dilation.
Imaging findings are variable, depending on the size of the VSD. The classic imaging findings
of shunt vascularity and cardiomegaly typically take a few years to develop, although there
may be mild cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascular flow shortly after birth. The
left atrium is often enlarged, which may splay the mainstem bronchi at the carina.
If unrepaired, Eisenmenger syndrome may develop, which represents pulmonary
hypertension and reversal of the shunt direction. Eisenmenger syndrome is rare as most
patients undergo surgery before pulmonary flow reversal occurs.
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
The ductus arteriosus is a normal vascular
PDA
structure of the fetal circulation that
connects the proximal left pulmonary
artery to the descending aorta. The ductus
normally functionally closes by 48 hours of
life and anatomically closes by 1-3 months.
A patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) results
in a persistent left-to-right shunt. PDA is
associated with maternal rubella and pre-
term infants, thought to be due to elevated
fetal prostaglandins, which inhibit closure
of the ductus.
A: small PDA is usually asymptomatic. A
large PDA may produce a characteristic
machine-like murmur and cause CHF in
infancy.
The classic clinical presentation of PDA is a premature infant who develops radiographic
evidence of CHF at 7-10 days of life, as pulmonary vascular resistance begins to fall.
Treatment of PDA is medical (ndomethacin, a prostaglandin inhibitor) or surgical (clip
placement). Eisenmenger syndrome may develop if untreated.
Peds: 1111