CT imaging of small bowel obstruction
CT is highly sensitive and specific for diagnosis of SBO. Small bowel distention 23 cm with a
focal/discrete transition point to collapsed bowel is highly specific for a SBO.
Benefits of CT include confirmation of diagnosis of SBO, visualization of the etiology and
assessment of complications of obstruction such as ischemia or strangulation.
It is important to approach the interpretation of an obstruction in a systematic way.
First, look for the transition point to decompressed bowel to determine the cause.
Second, always determine if the obstruction is simple or closed-loop (see below). A closed-
loop obstruction is a never miss diagnosis as there is very high risk for bowel ischemia and
therefore, severe morbidity and mortality.
Third, evaluate for signs of ischemia or impending ischemia, which include (in rough order of
severity):
Engorged mesenteric vessels.
Mesenteric edema.
Ascites surrounding the bowel or inter-loop fluid, due to increased capillary permeability.
Wall thickening, due to submucosal edema.
Lack of bowel wall enhancement, due to vasoconstriction or underperfusion. Note that the presence or
absence of bowel wall enhancement can only be assessed if positive oral contrast was not given.
Pneumatosis intestinalis, which is gas in the bowel wall due to necrosis. Pneumatosis produces multiple
small locules of gas seen circumferentially in the bowel wall.
In addition to small bowel distention >3
cm and a transition point to decompressed
bowel, an additional helpful CT finding of
SBO is the small bowelfeces sign, which
describes particulate feculent material
mixed with gas bubbles in the small bowel
that resembles the CT appearance of stool.
The small bowel feces sign is often seen just
proximal to the transition point and is helpful to
localize the site of transition.
The sign may be especially helpful in subacute
or partial obstruction, which can otherwise be Small bowel feces sign: Axial CT shows an obstruction. A
difficult to diagnose.
loop of small bowel in the right lower quadrant (arrow)
The sign is thought to be due to bacterial
demonstrates numerous gas locules and particulate
overgrowth and undigested food.
material in the small bowel.
GI: 198