SHOULDER LIGAMENTS AND ROTATOR INTERVAL
Anatomy of the shoulder ligaments
coracoid
acromion
process
coracohumeral
ligament (CHL)
attaches to
greater
rotator interval contains CHL, LHBT, and SGHL
tuberosity
SGHL
superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL) and
MGHL
middles glenohumeraligament. (MGHL) connect the
lesser tuberosity tot the supraglenoidi tubercle ofthes scapula.
=
long head
biceps
IGHL
the inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) connects the the
tendon
inferiorg glenoid labrum with thec anatomicr neck ofthel humerus.
(LHBT)
The rotator interval is a triangular region that allows rotational motion around the coracoid
process. It is located between the supraspinatus and subscapularis tendons. The rotator
interval contains the coracohumeral ligament (CHL), the long head of the biceps tendon
(LHBT), and the superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL).
The CHL connects the lateral aspect of the coracoid process to the greater tubercle of the
humerus, where the CHL blends with the supraspinatus tendon. The CHL helps to stabilize
the intra-articular biceps tendon together with the superior glenohumeral ligament as the
biceps pulley. The CHL is located external to the joint capsule.
The glenohumera. ligaments (SGHL, MGHL, and IGHL) are derived from the labrum and form
a portion of the joint capsule.
The superior glenohumeral ligament (SGHL) connects the lesser tuberosity to the
supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula.
The middle glenohumeral ligament (MGHL) also connects the lesser tuberosity to the
supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula. The MGHL is congenitally absent in up to 1/3 of
patients. Tears of the MGHL are associated with SLAP lesions.
The inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) connects the anatomic neck of the humerus
to the inferior glenoid labrum. The IGHL is by far the most important component of the
capsulolabral complex for maintaining stability in abduction and external rotation. The IGHL
contains three components (the anterior band, the axillary pouch, and the posterior band),
all of which are well-seen on sagittal MR:
The anterior band of the IGHL provides anterior stability. There are several lesions of the anterior band of
the IGHL that are associated with anterior instability, discussed on the following page.
The IGHL forms the axillary pouch of the glenohumeral joint capsule.
The posterior band contributes to posterior stability. The IGHL is the only glenohumeral ligament to have a
posterior component.
The long head biceps tendon (LHBT) attaches to the anterosuperior glenoid rim along with
the SGHL and MGHL.
MSK: 1051