Epididymitis (continued)
Epididymitis is infection of the epididymis, almost always ascending from the urinary tract.
The classic clinical presentation of epididymitis is acute unilateral scrotal pain.
Al key ultrasound finding of epididymitis is an enlarged epididymis with increased color
Doppler flow relative to the testicle. An associated hydrocele may be present, which often
contains low-level echoes.
The main differential based on clinical presentation is testicular torsion, which would
demonstrate decreased testicular blood flow. In contrast, epididymitis features normal
testicular blood flow.
Epididymo-orchitis
Epididymo-orchitis is infection which has spread from the epididymis to the testicle.
Epididymo-orchitis has a similar ultrasound appearance to epididymitis, but blood flow to
the testicle will also be increased.
Infection and secondary inflammation can cause venous hypertension, which is a risk factor
for focal testicular ischemia.
Fournier gangrene
Fournier gangrene: Axial unenhanced CT shows a right ischial decubitus ulcer (yellow arrows) and soft tissue
gas (better seen on bone window, right image; red arrows) in the right perineum tracking along the lateral
margin of the penile base.
Fournier gangrene is necrotizing fasciitis of the scrotum and perineum, a highly morbid and
surgically emergent condition.
Infection is usually polymicrobial.
The key imaging finding is the presence of subcutaneous gas, often evaluated with CT. The
appearance on ultrasound is of multiple echogenic foci in the subcutaneous tissues with
dirty posterior shadowing.
TESTICULAR MASSES
Approach to a testicular mass
Intratesticular masses are usually malignant (90-95%). Conversely, most extratesticular
masses are benign in an adult, although a pediatric mass in this location may be malignant.
The retroperitoneum should always be evaluated if an intratesticular mass is seen. Likewise,
if retroperitoneal adenopathy is seen in a reproductive-age male, the testicles should always
be examined.
Most scrotal masses are hypoechoic relative to normal testicular parenchyma.
On Doppler ultrasound, most masses will have increased vascularity with high diastolic flow,
producing a low resistance waveform.
GU: 288