LIVER TRAUMA
Overview of liver trauma
The liver is the second most commonly injured solid organ due to blunt trauma, second to
the spleen.
The 2018 revised organ injury scale (OIS) for liver published by the American Association for
the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) includes imaging, operative, and pathologic criteria for grading
injury. The final AAST grade assigned is based on the highest of the three criteria.
The imaging criteria is based on CT findings and is more commonly used by radiologists. It is
similar to the organ injury scale for splenic trauma.
American Association for the Surgery of Trauma liver injury scale (imaging criteria)
Grade :
Subcapsular hematoma <10% liver surface.
Superficial laceration <1 cm deep.
Grade I:
Subcapsular hematoma 10-50% liver surface.
Intraparenchymal hematoma <10 cm in size.
Laceration 1-3 cm deep.
Grade II:
Subcapsular hematoma >50% liver surface.
Ruptured vtapaularmaparendyma hematoma.
Laceration >3 cm deep.
Any intraparenchymal vascular injury (i.e., pseudoaneurysm or AV fistula) or contained active bleeding.
Grade IV:
Laceration involving 25-75% of one hepatic lobe.
Extraparenchyma extension of active bleeding into the peritoneum.
Grade V:
Laceration or destruction >75% of one hepatic lobe.
Injury to retrohepatic IVC or central hepatic veins.
When multiple injuries are present, advance one grade up to a grade III.
AAST grading system is limited for assessment of biliary injury. If injury to the biliary system
is suspected, nuclear medicine HIDA scan is often needed to demonstrate an active bile leak.
MRI with hepatobiliary agent such as Eovist may also be helpful.
Left image: CT angiogram axial image demonstrates a large subcapsular hematoma (yellow arrows) along the
right hepatic lobe with no evidence of active extravasation.
Right image: Portal venous phase CT axial image shows hypodense geographic/linear regions (yellow arrow) in
the right hepatic lobe, indicating hepatic lacerations. Note the large right chest wall hematoma (red arrow).
GI: 120