Hemorrhagic transformation of infarct
In most cases, the clinical or imaging diagnosis of stroke is made before hemorrhagic
transformation occurs; however, hemorrhage may occasionally be the presenting feature of
an infarct.
More commonly, symptomatic hemorrhage occurs post-infarct in approximately 6-12% of
patients receiving thrombolytic therapy.
Noncontrast CT can identify risk factors for hemorrhagic transformation after thrombolytic
therapy, including a relatively large region of hypoattenuation and a dense artery sign. Note
that per AHA guidelines, neither of these findings is an exclusion criterion for administration
of IV tPA.
Venous thrombosis
Hemorrhagic venous infarct: Axial noncontrast CT shows intraparenchymal hemorrhage in the left parieto-
occipital lobes (left image) and an expanded/lyperdense superior sagittal sinus (middle image, arrow). Axial
CTA shows a filling defect in the superior sagittal sinus (empty delta sign; arrow) in keeping with dural venous
thrombosis.
Thrombosis of cortical veins or deep venous sinuses leads to venous hypertension, which
may cause infarction and parenchymal hemorrhage.
Aneurysmal hemorrhage
As discussed, aneurysmal hemorrhage is by far the most common cause of nontraumatic
subarachnoid hemorrhage. If an intraparenchymal hematoma is due to an aneurysm, the
hematoma is usually adjacent to the ruptured aneurysm dome.
The pattern of subarachnoid blood may help localize the aneurysm; however, if the
patient was found down, then the blood will settle in the dependent portion of the brain,
confounding localization.
CT angiography is the study of choice for further evaluation of nontraumatic subarachnoid
hemorrhage.
Vascular malformations
Intraparenchymal hemorrhage from vascular malformations occurs in younger patients
(often younger than 50 years) than does hemorrhage secondary to hypertension or cerebral
amyloid angiopathy.
Among vascular malformations, the most common cause of intraparenchymal hemorrhage
is arteriovenous malformation (AVM). Less common causes are cavernous malformation and
dural arteriovenous fistula (dAVF).
See the preceding section on vascular malformations for imaging description.
Neuro Brain: 697