COMPLICATIONS OF VASCULAR ACCESS
Hematoma
Al hematoma may be superficial or retroperitoneal. A superficial subcutaneous hematoma
has a generally benign clinical course, while a retroperitoneal hematoma carries a risk of
fatal hemorrhage.
There is increased risk of retroperitoneal hematoma with a high (more cranial) arterial
puncture above the pelvic brim.
Pseudoaneurysm
Pseudoaneurysm formation occurs in approximately 1% of arterial punctures. On color
Doppler, a pseudoaneurysm appears as a swirling yin-yang with high-velocity flow at the site
of communication with the femoral artery.
Watchful waiting can be performed for a small pseudoaneurysm <1 cm in size. Ultrasound-
guided thrombin injection is the treatment of choice for a pseudoaneurysm >1 cm. Less
commonly, ultrasound-guided compression of the neck of the pseudoaneurysm can be
performed to thrombose the pseudoaneurysm.
Arteriovenous fistula (AVF)
An arteriovenous fistula (AVF) is an anomalous connection between an artery and a vein.
AVFS are usually asymptomatic but may enlarge and ultimately cause high-output cardiac
failure.
There is increased risk of developing an iatrogenic AVF with a low (inferior/distal) femoral
arterial puncture. The femoral vein often passes deep to (instead of medial to) the femoral
artery distal to the standard puncture site.
On Doppler ultrasound, an AVF demonstrates arterial flow within a vein and there is loss
of the normal triphasic waveform in the artery. Increased diastolic flow is often seen in the
artery proximal to the fistula.
INJECTION RATES
The terminology for injection rates for angiographic runs is "cc/sec for total cc." For instance,
"25 for 50" means an injection rate of 25 cc/sec for a total of 50 CC.
The diameter in mm of a vessel is a rough guide to the injection rate (in cc/sec), and the
total volume of contrast injected depends on the intravascular volume of the vascular bed.
Aortogram (aortic arch): 25 for 50
Mesenteric artery: 51 for 25
Abdominal aorta: 15 for 30
Renal artery: 5 for 15
Inferior vena cavogram: 20 for 30
Distal artery: 3 for 12
AIR EMBOLISM- Air embolism is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication of vascular procedures.
The most dangerous portion of a venous access procedure is the insertion of the catheter
into the peel-away sheath.
If air embolism is suspected (e.g., if the patient becomes acutely hypoxic as the catheter is
inserted into the peel-away sheath), the patient should be immediately placed in the left-
lateral decubitus (left side down) position SO the air bubble remains antidependent in the
right heart. 100% oxygen should be administered. If practical, fluoroscopy can be used to
identify the air bubble. Catheter aspiration can be considered if the air bubble is large.
IR: 597