Suprasellar cistern
The suprasellar cistern is the pentagonal basal cistern located above the sella, under the
hypothalamus, between the unci of the temporal lobes, and anterior to the interpeduncular
cistern.
Supratentorial mass effect with uncal herniation effaces the suprasellar cistern from the side(s).
Spontaneous intracranial hypotension reduces the height of the suprasellar cistern.
Multiple important neurovascular structures traverse the suprasellar cistern: Optic nerves
and chiasm, infundibulum, and circle of Willis.
INTRASELLAR LESIONS
Pituitary adenoma
Microadenoma: Coronal T2-weighted (left image) and sagittal T1 post-contrast MRI (right image) shows a
subcentimeter T2 hyperintense, hypoenhancing lesion in the central pituitary gland (arrows).
Adenomas are by far the most common intrinsic pituitary mass but can have suprasellar
extension when large.
Adenomas are classified by size as microadenomas (K10 mm) or macroadenomas (210 mm).
They are also classified by hormonal production, with the most common being lactotroph
and nonfunctioning adenomas.
Patients present with symptoms of endocrine dysfunction (hypogonadism, acromegaly,
Cushing disease, or hyperthyroidism) or, in the case of macroadenomas, mass effect (visual
field deficits due to optic pathway compression, headache).
Rarely, patients present with pituitary apoplexy, a clinical syndrome of severe headache, visual
impairment, and hypopituitarism caused by sudden hemorrhage into the pituitary. The typical cause is
pituitary adenoma.
Sheehan syndrome refers to pituitary apoplexy in postpartum women associated with hypopituitarism.
Ini the acute phase, imaging shows an enlarged pituitary gland possibly with high intrinsic T1 signal due to
hemorrhage. Over time, the pituitary atrophies, leaving a partially empty sella.
Most cases are sporadic but syndromic causes include multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
(MEN1).
Microadenomas usually appear on MRI as foci of subtle signal abnormality within the gland
on conventional sequences, but contrast-enhanced sequences improve sensitivity. Most
microadenomas show delayed enhancement relative to the normal pituitary, which appears
hypoenhancing based on the timing of most post-contrast protocols. Dynamic imaging with
early and delayed phases is needed to detect a small subset of microadenomas.
Neuro Head & Neck: 797