Mitral stenosis
The most common cause of mitral stenosis is rheumatic heart disease.
Mitral stenosis appears as a normal size heart with left atrial enlargement.
Pulmonary venous pressures are typically elevated.
Normal mitral valve has an orifice area of 4-6 cm?. A valvular area <1 cm2 and pressure
gradient >10 mmHg define severe mitral stenosis.
Mitral regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation is most commonly caused by degenerative valvular disease, mitral
valve prolapse, rheumatic heart disease, endocarditis, ischemic heart disease, annular
calcification, and cardiomyopathy.
Acute mitral regurgitation secondary to myocardial infarction can present as acute
pulmonary edema with a normal size heart.
Chronic mitral regurgitation can lead to cardiac dilatation and left atrial enlargement.
The left atrial appendage (LAA) is often enlarged in patients with rheumatic disease; however, the LAA is
typically not enlarged in non-rheumatic mitral regurgitation.
Mitral valve prolapse is diagnosed when there is prolapse or "bowing" of the valve leaflets
greater than 2 mm below the annular plane into the left atrium during systole.
Mitral annular calcification
Contrast-enhanced axial CT in bone windows
demonstrates extensive calcification of the mitral
valve annulus (arrows).
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of
Virginia Health System.
Mitral annular calcification (MAC) is a degenerative process where calcium is deposited
along the fibrous annulus encircling the mitral valve.
MAC may be associated with increased risk of stroke, adverse cardiovascular events, and
atrial fibrillation. MAC is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease.
MAC can be associated with mitral regurgitation, but unlike mitral valve calcifications, MAC
is not associated with mitral stenosis.
Right-sided valvular disease
The right side of the heart is preferentially involved in patients with carcinoid disease,
leading to tricuspid and pulmonic valve dysfunction, although the left-sided valves can be
involved as well.
PERICARDIAL DISEASE
Pericardial anatomy
The pericardium consists of two layers (the visceral and parietal pericardium), which are
separated by approximately 40 mL of pericardial fluid.
The pericardial apparatus (combination of the visceral and parietal layers and pericardial
fluid) measures <1 mm on cadaveric studies and can be seen on CT and MRI, with a normal
thickness <2 mm. A pericardial thickness of >4 mm on imaging is considered abnormal.
Cardiac: 530