Pituitary adenoma (continued)
As adenomas are typically slow-growing, macroadenomas enlarge and remodel the sella.
Pituitary macroadenomas can invade the cavernous sinus and encase the internal carotid
artery. High risk of invasion is predicted on preoperative coronal MR images when the tumor
extends laterally beyond the tangent line connecting the lateral walls of the supraclinoid and
cavernous internal carotid artery segments. Complete encasement of the internal carotid
artery certainly indicates cavernous sinus invasion but this sign occurs late.
As adenomas are typically soft, the diaphragma sellae can indent macroadenomas that
extend into the suprasellar cistern, creating the snowman sign (also known as a figure-of-8,
dumbbell, hourglass, or bottleneck configuration). They tend not to narrow the internal
carotid artery (whereas meningiomas or metastases can narrow the carotid).
Macroadenomas can be heterogeneous due to cystic change, necrosis, or hemorrhage.
Hemorrhagic pituitary adenoma is the most common sellar region lesion with intrinsic T1
hyperintensity, especially with a fluid level.
Macroadenoma: FLAIR (left image) and post-contrast sagittal T1-weighted MRI shows complete replacement of
the pituitary gland by an enhancing mass (yellow arrows). The optic chiasm is displaced superiorly (red arrow).
Pituitary hyperplasia
The normal pituitary varies widely in size depending on age, sex, and hormonal status.
Physiologic pituitary hyperplasia commonly occurs in periods of hormonal activity like
adolescence, pregnancy, and perimenopause.
Pathological pituitary hyperplasia is usually related to end-organ insufficiency, especially
primary hypothyroidism.
On imaging, pituitary hyperplasia appears as a homogeneously enlarged gland with a convex
superior margin.
Hypophysitis
Hypophysitis refers to inflammatory infiltration of the pituitary gland and sometimes also
infundibulum. It is classified by histology, with lymphocytic being most common, followed by
granulomatous and plasmacytic.
Lymphocytic hypophysitis usually occurs in women, typically in the peripartum period. It is
also a side effect of checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy (e.g., ipilimumab and nivolumab).
Granulomatous hypophysitis can be idiopathic or secondary to systemic disorders such as
sarcoidosis or granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's).
Plasmacytic hypophysitis is a rare IgG4-related disease.
MRI shows diffuse enlargement of the pituitary gland, and often the infundibulum, with
homogeneous enhancement.
Neuro Head & Neck: 798