Ulcerative colitis (UC)
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease that begins distally in
the rectum and spreads proximally in a continuous manner (unlike Crohn's disease, which
features skip areas).
Of note, it is possible for the rectum to appear normal with more proximal colonic involvement present if
the patient has been treated with corticosteroid enemas.
Patients with UC have an increased risk of primary sclerosing cholangitis,
cholangiocarcinoma and colon cancer.
Extra-abdominal manifestations of UC include sacroiliitis (symmetric, bilateral), iritis,
erythema nodosum (tender red subcutaneous nodules), and pyoderma gangrenosum
(cutaneous ulcers).
UC does not extend more proximally than the cecum; however, backwash ileitis caused by
reflux of inflammatory debris into the ileum may mimic Crohn's disease.
Chronic ulcerative colitis: Coronal (left image) and axial (right) contrast-enhanced CT shows continuous
thickening of the rectal wall (yellow arrows) with submucosal fat deposition (red arrows).
Imaging of ulcerative colitis features circumferential wall thickening with a granular mucosal
pattern that is best seen on barium enema. Pseudopolyps may be present during bouts
of acute inflammation and represent islands of normal mucosa surrounded by inflamed
mucosa. A collar-button ulcer is nonspecific but represents mucosal ulceration undermined
by submucosal extension.
Chronic changes of ulcerative colitis include a featureless (ahaustral) and foreshortened lead
pipe colon. As in Crohn's disease, submucosal fat deposition suggests chronic disease, as
seen in the case above.
Toxic megacolon is a severe complication of UC (and less commonly, Crohn's disease)
caused by inflammation extending through the muscular layer. maging of toxic megacolon
shows dilation of the colon to greater than 6 cm in association with adynamic ileus. Colonic
perforation may occur, therefore colonoscopy is contraindicated in patients with suspected
toxic megacolon.
GI: 216