DISTRIBUTION OF CALCIUM
Diffuse
Regional
Linear
Grouped
Segmental
usually benign
malignancy less likely
more: suspicious distribution
The distribution of calcification can greatly affect the suspicion of malignancy.
Although diffuse and regional calcifications are usually benign, the morphology of the
calcifications in question is also important. A regional distribution of suspicious fine
pleomorphic or fine-linear branching calcifications may represent cancer.
Similarly, a more suspicious distribution (linear, grouped/Clustered, or segmental) of
calcifications with a typically benign morphology may warrant further workup.
Diffuse
Diffuse calcifications are distributed randomly throughout the breast.
Punctate and amorphous calcifications in a diffuse or scattered distribution are usually
benign and often bilateral, typically associated with fibrocystic change or sclerosing
adenosis.
Regional
Regional calcifications are distributed in a large area (>2 cm in largest dimension) of breast
tissue not conforming to a ductal distribution. Since this distribution may involve most of a
quadrant or more than a single quadrant, malignancy is less likely.
Linear
Linear calcifications are arrayed in a line.
Linear distribution of calcifications elevates suspicion for malignancy as this suggests calcium
deposits within a duct.
Note that typically benign large rod-like calcifications are often linear in distribution.
Grouped
Grouped calcifications are defined as at least five small calcifications located within 1 cm of
each other, with the extent of the calcifications measuring <2 cm in size. Calcifications >2 cm
in extent are considered regional in distribution, as described above.
Grouped calcifications raise suspicion for malignancy.
Segmental
Segmental calcifications suggest calcium deposited in a ductal system, which is worrisome.
When the morphology is clearly secretory (rod-like), a segmental distribution can be benign.
When ntermedlate-suspicion (such as amorphous) or typically benign (such as round or
punctate) calcifications are seen in a segmental distribution, concern should be raised for
malignancy.
Breast: 388