Spin-echo proton density (PD)-weighted imaging
Proton density (PD) images are not used in many neuroradiology MRI protocols, but they do
have the highest signal-to-noise ratio of any sequence. PD sequences may be useful in the
evaluation of multiple sclerosis (MS), especially in the spinal cord.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)
DWI depicts Brownian motion of water protons. Signal is lost with increasing diffusion.
Free water (CSF) experiences the most signal attenuation, while many pathologic processes
(primarily ischemia) cause reduced diffusivity and less signal loss.
DWI is an inherently T2-weighted sequence with diffusion-sensitzing pulsed gradients
applied sequentially in multiple directions. The b-value is the setting that determines the
degree of diffusion weighting, which is based on the diffusion gradient amplitude, duration,
and time interval between pulses.
The higher the b-value, the more contrast the image will provide for detecting reduced diffusivity.
The downside to increasing the b-value is a decrease in the signal-to-noise ratio, unless scan time is
proportionally increased for additional acquisitions.
DWI is typically displayed in two ways, interpreted together: Trace images and ADC
(apparent diffusion coefficient) maps.
Trace images are a summation of the source images sensitive to diffusion in different directions. Reduced
diffusivity will be hyperintense and lesions are very conspicuous.
The ADC map: shows pure diffusion information without any T2 weighting, obtained by calculating the
exponential decay constant when plotting the MR: signal obtained with a set of at least two b-values. In
contrast to DWI, reduced diffusivity is hypointense on the ADC map.
Because readers are less sensitive to detecting reduced diffusivity using the ADC map alone, DWI is the
primary sequence used to detect diffusion abnormalities.
Whereas trace images show a scalar measure of diffusion, diffusion tensori imaging (DTI) depicts
directional asymmetries, called anisotropy, such as that inherent to white matter fiber tracts.
An important pitfall to be aware of is the phenomenon of T2. shine-through. Because DWI
images are T2-weighted, lesions with long T2 relaxation times will also be hyperintense
on DWI, particularly on low b-value images. True restricted diffusion will correlate with a
corresponding area of hypointensity on the ADC map.
Restricted diffusion is best known in the setting of acute ischemic stroke, as DWI is sensitive
for infarction within minutes of onset. However, the causes of reduced diffusion are diverse:
Neoplastic: e.g., lymphoma, glioblastoma, medulloblastoma.
Inflammatory: e.g-, multiple sclerosis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.
Infectious: e.g., abscess, empyema, ventriculitis, herpes encephalitis, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Vascular: e.g., arterial or venous infarction, global hypoxic-ischemic injury, posterior reversible
encephalopathy syndrome.
Toxic: e.g., carbon monoxide, methanol, ethylene glycol, Wernicke encephalopathy, chemotherapy.
Metabolic: e.g., osmotic demyelination, hypoglycemic encephalopathy, hepatic encephalopathy.
Congenital: e.g., epidermoid cyst, mitochondrial diseases.
Traumatic: diffuse axonal injury, hematoma.
Seizure (status epilepticus).
Treatment: radiosurgery, antiangiogenic therapy.
Neuro Brain: 658