Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
HCC in a cirrhotic liver: T2-weighted (top left image)
and T1-weighted post-contrast late arterial phase (top
right image) MRI shows a nodular external contour
of the liver, consistent with cirrhosis. There is a T2
hyperintense, hypervascular mass in hepatic segment
2 (arrows), representing HCC.
Unenhanced CT (left image) shows the mass to be
isoattenuating and barely perceptible (arrows).
Case courtesy Chery! Sadow, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most common primary liver tumor. Cirrhosis is the major
risk factor for development of HCC, with other risk factors including chronic viral hepatitis
(hepatitis B) and fatty liver disease. A hypervascular liver mass in a patient with cirrhosis or
chronic hepatitis is HCC until proven otherwise.
Alpha-feto protein (AFP) is elevated in approximately 75% of cases of HCC.
Patients with cirrhosis or chronic viral hepatitis are regularly screened for HCC with serum
a-fetoprotein levels and imaging, typically ultrasound or MRI.
Ultrasound is not very sensitive to detect small HCC in end-stage cirrhotic livers. The aim is to detect single
HCC foci measuring less than 20 mm in diameter, characterized by a better prognosis and exhibiting less
than 20% risk of hematogenous spread.
HCC has a variety of ultrasound appearances - therefore, a mass in a cirrhotic liver is considered HCC
until proven otherwise. High Doppler flow may be present, especially at the periphery of the mass, due to
arteriovenous shunting.
The classic CT or MRI appearance of HCC is an encapsulated mass that enhances on arterial
phase and washes out on portal venous phase with an enhancing capsule. HCC may be
difficult to detect on non-contrast or portal venous phase CT. On unenhanced MRI, HCC is
characteristically slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted images relative to surrounding liver
and may show restricted diffusion.
The nodule in a nodule appearance describes an enhancing nodule within a dysplastic nodule and
represents an early HCC.
HCC is often locally invasive and tends to invade into the portal and hepatic veins, IVC, and
bile ducts. In contrast, cholangiocarcinoma and metastases to the liver are much less likely
to do SO.
The portal veins should always be carefully evaluated in the presence of a hepatic mass. Internal Doppler
flow or enhancement within a venous clot suggests a tumor-in-vein.
GI: 106