HYDROCEPHALUS
Communicating nydrocephalus is ventricular enlargement due to an increase in CSF volume
without an obstructing lesion within the ventricular system.
Processes that obstruct arachnoid granulation reabsorption of CSF can cause communicating
hydrocephalus, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, meningitis, or leptomeningeal metastases.
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a form of communicating hydrocephalus characterized by
normal CSF pressure and the clinical triad of ataxia, incontinence, and dementia. Imaging typically shows
ventriculomegaly, acute callosal angle (measured between the lateral ventricles on a coronal image at the
posterior commissure), widened Sylvian fissures, and tight high convexity (crowding of gyri at the vertex).
Noncommunicating hydrocephalus is hydrocephalus due to an obstructing lesion within
the ventricular system, such as a third ventricular colloid cyst, aqueductal stenosis, or a
posterior fossa mass.
Obstructive hydrocephalus usually refers to noncommunicating hydrocephalus but can
also include communicating hydrocephalus attributed to obstruction at the level of the
subarachnoid spaces or arachnoid granulations.
Hydrocephalus ex vacuo refers to ventricular enlargement due to brain parenchymal
volume loss.
CEREBRAL EDEMA
Brain swelling, due to various etiologies, within a closed skull reduces the volume of blood
and/or CSF compartments (Monro-Kellie doctrine).
Edema within the brain can be caused by cell death, altered capillary permeability, or
hemodynamic forces.
Compared to normal brain parenchyma, edematous brain appears hypoattenuating on CT
and FLAIR hyperintense on MRI.
Cytotoxic edema
Cytotoxic edema is cell swelling caused by damaged molecular sodium-potassium ATPase
ion pumps, most commonly due to acute ischemia. Failure to maintain ion gradients results
in cellular (true cytotoxic) edema, wherein fluid moves from the extracellular space into the
intracellular space, followed by ionic edema, wherein fluid moves from the intravascular
space into the extracellular space across an intact blood-brain barrier.
Both gray and white matter are affected. Cellular edema appears as abnormally restricted
diffusion on MRI. lonic edema appears as loss of gray-white differentiation on CT.
Vasogenic edema
Blood-brain barrier breakdown results in vasogenic edema, wherein plasma protein-rich
fluid moves from the intravascular space into the extracellular space due to increased
capillary permeability.
The causes are diverse, including neoplasm, infection, inflammation, hemorrhage, subacute
arterial infarct, and venous infarct.
White matter is primarily affected. MRI shows facilitated diffusion (increased diffusivity). CT
shows accentuated gray-white differentiation.
Interstitial edema
Increased ventricular pressure results in transependymal flow, wherein CSF moves from the
intraventricular space into the brain extracellular space.
The most common cause is acute obstructive nydrocephalus.
Periventricular white matter is primarily affected.
Neuro Brain: 654