Microwave ablation (continued)
Disadvantages: MWA uses larger diameter probes. There is a higher risk when ablating
central tumors and any region with critical structures due to the inability to monitor the
ablation zone in real time and relative unpredictability of the size and shape of the ablation
zone. Similarly, due to the inability to precisely control the ablation zone, MWA is less
precise with smaller tumors.
A
B
C
Microwave ablation in a 58-year-old female with epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of the liver. A) Axial T1
post-contrast image shows peripherally enhancing lesion (arrow). B) Intra-procedural noncontrast CT shows
the ablation probe in the liver; the ablation zone is not well seen during the procedure. Note that artificial
ascites was used to protect the adjacent diaphragm and body wall from injury, given peripheral location of the
lesion. C) Axial T1 post-contrast subtraction image at two months shows complete ablation coverage of the
tumor. Subtraction images are helpful to exclude residual tumoral enhancement.
Case courtesy of Sharath Bhagavatula, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Cryoablation (CA)
Mechanism: Rapid expansion of gas within the cryoablation (CA) probe cools the probe
to -190°C, resulting in an "iceball" of the surrounding tissue. At least two cycles of rapid
freezing and slow thawing are done, each lasting 5-20 minutes. Cell death occurs secondary
to immediate cellular toxicity or delayed apoptosis and ischemia.
Technique: Probes are usually placed under CT or MRI guidance and should be spaced 1-2
cm apart. The iceball should extend at least 0.5 cm beyond the tumor to decrease likelihood
of recurrence.
Advantages: The iceball is well visualized in real time on CT, MRI, and ultrasound. There
is comparatively less risk with cryoablation of central tumors. Multiple probes can be
used simultaneously in cryoablation rather than sequentially. Cryoablation has a lower
complication rate with typically less post-procedural pain.
Disadvantages: Cryoablation has a slightly increased bleeding risk due to the lack of
concurrent cautery. Multiple probes and several freeze-thaw cycles result in longer
procedural time. Cryoablation creates a robust inflammatory response that may result
in "cryoshock,* typically seen with large volume liver cryoablation, which is mediated by
cytokine production and consists of hypotension, multi-organ failure, and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. Cryoablation may be associated with higher cost.
IR: 638