Spatial resolution
Coronary arteries have an average lumenal diameter of approximately 3 mm.
The latest CT scanners have a spatial resolution up to 0.18 mm. Axial image reconstructions
should have slice thickness <1.0 mm for optimal evaluation of coronary arteries. Thicker
slices may be used in obese patients to reduce image noise.
In contrast, catheter angiography has a spatial resolution of approximately 0.16 mm.
Temporal resolution and "freezing" of cardiac motion
A single source CT scanner requires slightly more than 180 degrees of gantry rotation for
image acquisition. For a complete rotation time of 330 ms, the temporal resolution is "165
ms, calculated as rotation time/2.
Dual source CT has two X-ray sources oriented 90 degrees to each other and needs to rotate
only 90 degrees to complete a reconstruction, which effectively cuts the temporal resolution
to 1/4 of the gantry rotation time. For third-generation dual source CTS with a rotation time
of 250 ms, the temporal resolution is -66 ms.
Intravenous access
Appropriate intravenous access is required for rapid bolus administration of contrast via
a power injector. High infusion rates (4-7 mL/sec) are needed to adequately opacify the
coronary arteries. A saline chaser bolus follows the contrast injection to wash out the veins
and right atrium, in order to reduce streak artifact from the contrast bolus.
Target heart rate and pre-scanning medications
A low heart rate (<60 bpm) and regular rhythm are desired to maximize the R-R interval.
Beta-blockade is usually necessary to achieve the target heart rate. Oral metoprolol is
administered (between 5 and 25 mg, typically administered in 5 mg doses). Oral beta-
blocker gives better heart rate control and decreased heart rate variability compared to IV.
With dual source CT, it is possible to scan without heart rate control, even for patients with arrhythmias.
Just prior to scanning, a sublingual nitroglycerin (0.4-0.8 mg) is administered to dilate the
coronary arteries.
Cardiac: 506