LIVER TRANSPLANT
Surgical candidates
The Milan criteria is used to assess appropriateness of liver transplantation in those with
HCC or cirrhosis. To be considered for orthotopic liver transplantation, one must have:
Single tumor <5 cm or up to three tumors, each with diameter <3 cm.
No extrahepatic involvement.
No major vascular involvement.
Post-operative appearance
Normal findings may include periportal edema, minimal ascites, right-sided pleural effusion,
and a small perihepatic hematoma.
Complications
Vascular: Hepatic artery thrombosis is the most common vascular complication. Others
include hepatic artery stenosis and pseudoaneurysm, IVC or hepatic vein stenosis or
thrombosis and portal vein stenosis or thrombosis.
Biliary: Ductal stricture is the most common biliary complication. Leaks and obstruction due
to choledocholithiasis are also possible.
Other complications include hematoma, abscess, hepatitis, splenic infarct, recurrent
malignancy or primary sclerosing cholangitis (depending on the indication for transplant)
and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD).
PTLD is a type of lymphoma caused by Epstein-Barr virus which can arise after solid organ or bone marrow
transplant. Patients with renal transplants are at particular risk. PTLD may occur anywhere, regardless of
which organ was transplanted. Treatment is eduction/withdrawal of immunosuppression. PTLD appears
as a mass with a variable and nonspecific appearance.
VASCULAR LIVER DISEASE
Budd-Chiari
Budd-Chiari is hepatic venous outflow obstruction, which can be thrombotic or non-
thrombotic. Thrombotic Budd-Chiari may be due to hypercoagulative states including
hematologica. disorders, pregnancy, oral contraceptive use, malignancy, infection, and
trauma. It is very rare to have primary Budd-Chiari due to congenital hepatic vein anomaly,
as pictured below.
Congenital Budd-Chiari: Axial contrast-
enhanced CT shows massive enlargement
of the caudate lobe (yellow arrows) and the
right posterior segment. There is atrophy of
the left lobe and right anterior segments of
the liver. Collateral venous drainage in the
periphery of the liveri is seen as geographic
peripheral hyperenhancement (red arrows).
The causative congenital hepatic vein
anomaly is not visualized at this level.
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham
and Women' 's Hospital.
Acute Budd-Chiari presents with the clinical triad of hepatomegaly, ascites, and abdominal
pain.
Vascular findings include lack of Doppler flow or contrast within hepatic veins, thrombus in
the hepatic veins/IVC, and the formation of collateral vessels which appear as a spider web
on venography.
GI: 121