Osteosarcoma (continued)
Parosteal (PAR-osteal) osteosarcoma is a juxtacortical osteosarcoma that arises from
the outer periosteum. It most commonly occurs at the posterior aspect of distal femoral
metaphysis and has a cauliflower-like exophytic morphology (mnemonic: par-boil cauliflower
before eating). A lucent line may be seen separating it from the cortex.
Radiograph
Sagittal post-contrast T1-weighted Axial post-contrast T1-weighted
MRI with fat suppression.
MRI with fat suppression.
Parosteal osteosarcoma: Frontal radiograph of the femur shows a large exophytic "cauliflower-like"
mass involving the femoral diaphysis (arrows). Sagittal T1 post-contrast image in the same patient shows
the large lobulated mass with peripheral enhancement (arrow). Axial T1 post-contrast images again
demonstrate the cauliflower-like lobulations with peripheral enhancement (arrows).
Patients are usually in their third and fourth decades, older compared to other osteosarcoma subtypes.
Parosteal osteosarcoma is the least malignant of all osteosarcomas, with "90% five-year survival.
Periosteal (PERI-osteal) osteosarcoma, the other juxtacortical osteosarcoma, is a rare
osteosarcoma variant arising from the inner periosteum. It features cortical thickening,
aggressive periosteal reaction, and a soft-tissue mass. Histologically, periosteal
osteosarcoma may show chondroid differentiation.
Radiograph
Sagittal PD-weighted MRI
Sagittal post-contrast T1-weighted
MRI with fat suppression.
Periosteal osteosarcoma: Lateral radiograph of the knee shows a mass in the anterior proximal tibial
diaphysis with associated soft tissue mass and periosteal reaction (arrow). Sagittal PD-weighted MRI shows
an intermediate signal intensity mass (arrow) abutting the anterior tibial periosteum, with post-contrast
image showing heterogeneous enhancement. Excisional biopsy showed periosteal osteosarcoma.
The most common location of periosteal osteosarcoma is the diaphysis of the femur or tibia.
Patients tend to be younger than 20 years old.
MSK: 942