Focal heating and
Conductive loops can cause local heating. Examples of conductive loops include
thermal injuries
crossed arms, ECG leads, and unconnected surface coil leads in contact with patient's
skin.
Metallic objects can absorb radiofrequency energy and become hot.
Time-varying magnetic fields can result in peripheral nerve stimulation, muscle
movement, and discomfort.
Signal to noise
ratio (SNR)
Signal to noise ratio (SNR) is proportional to: I * voxel * VNEX * B
xy,Z
VBW
I=i intrinsic signal intensity of voxel, dependent on tissue composition and pulse sequence
voxel z = voxel volume, affected by image matrix and slice thickness; a smaller voxel volume will
proportionally decrease signal to noise
NEX = number of excitations; linearly related to time of acquisition
BW = receiver bandwidth (range of frequencies collected by the MRI system; wide BW enables
faster data acquisition and reduces chemical shift artifacts but also adds noise - reduces SNR)
B =i intrinsic function of magnetic field strength
T1 and T2
Inherent tissue T1 and T2 characteristics depend on the longitudinal relaxation (T1)
and transverse relaxation (T2) times of the protons in that tissue.
Tissue signal abnormality is produced by alterations (prolongation or shortening)
of the transverse or longitudinal relaxation of the tissue, which may be affected by
various pathologic processes.
MR image weighting (e.g., T1- or T2-weighted images) depends on the repetition time
(TR) and echo time (TE) used to obtain images.
T1 image contrast is dependent on TR, which is the interval between sequential
radiofrequency pulses. The imaging appearance of specific tissues on T1-weighted
images depends on how much longitudinal relaxation occurs between each TR. Images
obtained with a short TR and a short TE are T1-weighted.
Short T1 relaxation times - higher signal on T1-weighted images.
Fat and subacute blood have short T1 relaxation times and therefore appear hyperintense on T1-
weighted images.
T2 image contrast is dependent on TE, which is the interval between the application
of the radiofrequency pulse and the collection of the signal. The imaging appearance
of tissues on T2-weighted images depends on how much transverse relaxation (loss of
proton phase coherence) occurs during each TE. Images obtained with a long TR and a
long TE are T2-weighted.
Slow loss of phase coherence - prolonged T2 relaxation times - hyperintense on T2-weighted
images.
Water has a long T2 relaxation time and therefore is hyperintense on T2-weighted images.
Physics: 1215