MALIGNANT PAROTID NEOPLASM
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
Mucoepidermoid carcinomas are the most common primary salivary gland malignancy,
especially in the parotid gland.
Low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma typically appears as a well-defined, enhancing mass
that is hyperintense on T2-weighted images. This appearance is indistinguishable from
benign pleomorphic adenoma on MRI.
High-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma has infiltrative margins and lower signal on T2-
weighted images.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma with perineural spread:
Axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrates
(top lefti image) a heterogeneously enhancing right
parotid mass involving the superficial and deep lobes
(yellow arrows).
Axial (top right image) and coronal (bottom left image)
post-contrast T1-weighted MRI through the skull base
shows asymmetric enlargement and enhancement
of the V, division of the right trigeminal nerve and
associated enlargement of the right foramen ovale
(red arrows), consistent with perineural tumor spread.
Adenoid cystic carcinomas are the most common primary malignancy of the submandibular,
sublingual, and minor salivary glands. They are also the second most common primary
parotid gland malignancy.
Among head and neck malignancies, adenoid cystic carcinoma has the highest risk of
perineural spread, which portends a poor prognosis. However, the most common histology
of head and neck cancers to show perineural spread is squamous cell carcinoma.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma has a high risk of local recurrence and metastasis.
Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma
Pleomorphic adenoma can undergo malignant transformation to so-called carcinoma ex
pleomorphic adenoma. The risk accumulates over many years.
The typical patient is an elderly person with a long-standing parotid mass that is newly
associated with rapid enlargement, pain, or facial nerve palsy.
In contrast to pleomorphic adenoma, carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma is hypointense on
T2-weighted images and shows low ADC values. The malignancy is infiltrative, showing ill-
defined borders and possible extension beyond the gland parenchyma.
Neuro Head & Neck: 791