Pyogenic abscess (continued)
On ultrasound, infection starts as an ill-defined area of altered echogenicity (phlegmon
stage) which evolves into a well-defined hypoechoic structure with internal echoes (mature
abscess).
Cholangitic abscess can be seen with bacterial cholangitis, or may occur in patients with
biliary stents, prior sphincterotomies or nepaticolejunostomies due to gastrointestinal reflux
into the biliary tree.
Tuberculosis (TB)
Tuberculosis (TB) causes granulomatous hepatitis, usually secondary to hematogenous
spread from primary pulmonary TB.
Lesions may be micro- or macronodular (rare), with multiple small hypoechoic
hypoenhancing nodules or larger mass-like areas which demonstrate variable enhancement.
These findings are often accompanied by nepatosplenomegaly
Fungal infection
Hepatic fungal infections typically show punctate, hypoenhancing microabscesses on CT and
MRI and tiny hypoechoic lesions on ultrasound. Lesions are T2 nyperintense and restrict
diffusion on MRI. Prior asymptomatic exposure and/or treated disease may show punctate,
echogenic athcatonsgranuomas
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is another form of granulomatous hepatitis secondary to the endemic
fungus Histoplasma capsulatum which is most commonly found in the Ohio and Mississippi
river valleys. It is more common in mmunocompromised patients but can be seen in
immunocompetent patients as well.
Hepatic involvement is usually secondary to spread from pulmonary histoplasmosis. In
addition to the typical imaging findings of fungal infections, hepatosplenomegaly and
hypoattenuating ymph nodes may also be seen.
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Hepatic Pneumocystis jiroveci is seen in disseminated disease in the severely
immunocompromised. Hepatic infection is classically secondary to the use of inhaled
pentamidine to treat pulmonary Pneumocystis pneumonia, as pentamidine is not absorbed
systemically and thus would not prevent hepatic infection.
Candidiasis
Systemic candida infection is almost always seen in mmunocompromised patients and may
seed the liver (and commonly the spleen as well).
Noncontrast CT shows innumerable
tiny hypoattenuating lesions scattered
throughout the liver and spleen (arrows),
representing candidal microabscesses in
a bone marrow transplant patient with
fungemia.
GI: 117