PHYSICS QUICK REVIEW
MEASURING RADIATION
Exposure,
Exposure is the charge of electrons liberated per unit mass of air. Exposure is measured in
air kerma,
Coulombs/Kg.
absorbed
Air kerma (kinetic energy released per mass) describes the incident X-ray beam intensity
dose,
as the kinetic energy transferred from uncharged particles (photons) to charged particles
equivalent
dose, and
(electrons). Air kerma is measured in Gray (J/Kg).
effective dose
Air kerma (Gy) can be converted to absorbed dose (also quantified in Gy) by the R factor,
which depends on kV and the atomic number (Z) of the absorbing tissue.
Bone (Z: = 12) absorbs much more energy than soft tissue (Z -7.6).
At 10 mGy air kerma, bone absorbs 40 Gy, tissue absorbs 11 Gy.
The equivalent dose (expressed in Sievert; Sv) is the absorbed dose in Gy multiplied by a
radiation weighting factor (WA)-
WA depends on the linear energy transfer (LET) of the type of radiation. For diagnostic radiology using
X-rays, WR = 1. An alpha particle has al high LET.
The effective dose (also expressed in Sv) is an estimation of radiation exposure that takes
into account the equivalent dose to all organs exposed and each organ's radiosensitivity.
Effective dose = the sum of the absorbed dose (Gy) * WA * W for all organs exposed.
W, is the tissue weighting factor, which varies from 0.12 for radiosensitive organs (e.g., bone marrow,
colon, lung, breast), to 0.01 for less sensitive organs, (e.g., bone, brain, and skin).
Radiation
SI (système international) units including Gray and Sievert are almost universally used
units
rather than the older non-SI units. One notable exception is the Curie, which is still
commonly used in nuclear medicine (typical dosing ranges are in millicuries).
SI units
Non-SI units
Gray (Gy) quantifies both absorbed
1 Rad (radiation absorbed dose) = 10 mGy
dose and air kerma (exposure) as
energy absorbed per unit mass.
1 Gy = 1 J/Kg
1 Gy = 100 Rad
Sievert (Sv) is used to quantify
1 Rem = 10 mSv
equivalent dose and effective dose.
1 Sv = 100 Rem
A Becquerel (Bq) is only used in nuclear e 1 Curie = 37 billion Becquerels =
medicine for radioactive materials.
3.7e10 disintegrations per second
1 Bq = 1 disintegration per second
Physics: 1202