INFLAMMATORY AND INFECTIOUS DISORDERS
Inflammatory disorders involving the thoracic aorta and great vessels include giant cell
arteritis, Takayasu arteritis, rheumatologic disorders, and radiation-induced aortitis.
Infectious causes of aortitis include syphilis, tuberculosis, pyogenic (especially Salmonella),
HIV, and mycotic etiologies.
Giant cell arteritis (GCA)
Giant cell arteritis: Two different patients with temporal artery biopsy proven GCA. MRA of the suprarenal
aorta (left image) and axial CTA (right image) through the infrarenal aorta demonstrate circumferential aortic
wall thickening.
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is predominantly a medium- and large-vessel vasculitis that has
overlapping imaging findings with Takayasu arteritis. GCA tends to affect older patients
(typically greater than 50 years of age) compared to Takayasu arteritis.
The medium-sized upper extremity arteries are most commonly affected in GCA, including
the subclavian, axillary, and brachial arteries. The aorta is rarely involved, unlike in Takayasu
arteritis. GCA typically produces long smooth stenoses.
In comparison, Takayasu arteritis often involves the aorta and is commonly associated with
occlusions.
Definitive diagnosis is with temporal artery biopsy. However, biopsy results could be false
negative up to 28% of cases, due to skip lesions or aortic involvement only.
Imaging findings of GCA on CTA or MRA are circumferential wall thickening of the aortic
segments and associated luminal narrowing or aneurysmal dilation.
FDG-PET/CT also can help in the diagnosis of the large vessel vasculitis: moderate to intense
FDG uptake in the involved vessels is the key imaging finding.
Treatment is steroids and tocilizumab (anti-IL-6).
Infectious aortitis
Infectious aortitis most commonly presents as a mycotic aneurysm and less commonly as
non-aneurysmal infection, although both may be complicated by rupture.
Pre-existing abnormality in the wall including atherosclerotic disease could make it
susceptible for infection.
Most common pathogens are Staph. aureus, Salmonella, Pneumococcus, and E. coli.
Syphilitic aortitis is a rare cause of aortic wall thickening and aneurysmal dilatation, usually
limited to the thoracic aorta.
CTA, MRA or FDG-PET/CT can be used in the diagnosis of the infectious aortitis.
Key imaging features are focal, crescentic shape aortic wall thickening, periaortic soft-tissue
accumulation, and rapid progression of saccular/mycotic aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm.
Vascular: 550