Varicocele (continued)
Varicocele is a common cause of infertility, seen in up to 40-75% of males presenting to an
infertility clinic.
Varicoceles are much more common on the left, as the left testicular vein drains into the
left renal vein at straight angle, whereas the right testicular vein drains directly into the
infrarenal IVC. 85% of varicoceles are left-sided and 15% are bilateral. An isolated right-sided
varicocele should prompt a search for a right-sided retroperitoneal mass.
On ultrasound, varicoceles appear as multiple tubular and serpentine anechoic structures
>2-3 mm in diameter in the region of the upper pole of the testis and epididymal head. The
varicoceles follow the spermatic cord into the inguinal canal and can be compressed by the
transducer. Careful optimization of Doppler parameters shows the slow venous flow within
the varicocele.
Epididymal cysts and spermatocele
A: spermatocele is cystic dilation of the epididymis filled with spermatozoa, usually occurring
in the epididymal head, but potentially occurring anywhere in the epididymis. Classic
ultrasound appearance is an epididymal cyst with internal low-level mobile echoes.
A: simple epididymal cyst and a spermatocele cannot be reliably distinguished by ultrasound.
Simple testicular cyst
A simple testicular cyst meets sonographic criteria for a simple cyst (smooth posterior wall,
imperceptible wall thickness, completely anechoic, posterior through transmission).
Tubular ectasia of rete testis
Transverse color Doppler ultrasound of the right testicle (left image) shows cystic dilation at the mediastinum
testes (arrow). There is no flow within the lesion. This appearance is highly suggestive of tubular ectasia,
although an avascular mass may rarely have a similar appearance.
Sagittal ultrasound (right image) shows elongation of the cystic dilation (arrows) along the mediastinum testes,
which is confirmatory for tubular ectasia.
Tubular ectasia of the rete testis is nonpalpable, asymptomatic, cystic dilation of the tubules
at the mediastinum testes caused by epididymal obstruction. Tubular ectasia is often
accompanied by an epididymal cyst or spermatocele. Tubular ectasia of the rete testis is
common in older patients and may be bilateral.
Imaging shows numerous tiny dilated structures in the region of the mediastinum testis,
often seen in conjunction with an epididymal cyst/spermatocele.
Tubular ectasia is benign and no treatment is necessary.
Tunical cyst
The tunica albuginea is the capsule overlying the testis. A cyst of the tunica albuginea
presents as a palpable superficial nodule that resembles a BB. No treatment is necessary.
Ultrasound shows a typically small, simple, extra-testicular cyst.
GU: 292