Complications of subarachnoid hemorrhage (continued)
Compared to DSA, less invasive imaging methods for detection/monitoring of vasospasm
include transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD) and CT angiography (CTA). In cases
of poor clinical grade, many guidelines recommend serial TCD for monitoring and CT
angiography with or without perfusion in cases when there is clinical deterioration or in
situations where TCD results are equivocal.
Use of TCD is limited by availability of acoustic windows, operator experience, and limited
evaluation of distal vessels. It has been proven useful for early detection and to help identify
clinically occult cases when patients are heavily sedated. CT is useful because of its rapid
availability, relative ease of interpretation, and better visualization of distal vasculature.
Newer techniques such as CT and MR perfusion and nuclear medicine studies are also being
investigated to identify areas of cerebral ischemia.
Oral nimodipine, a calcium channel blocker, is used for prophylaxis for delayed cerebral
ischemia. Conventional medical treatment of vasospasm includes triple H therapy,
describing the use of "hypervolemia, hemodilution, and hypertension" to maintain blood
pressure to the cerebral vasculature.
Endovascular therapy with intra-arterial (IA) vasodilators and transluminal balloon
angioplasty (TBA) are used in cases of severe or medically refractory vasospasm. Calcium
channel blockers are the preferred pharmacologic class for IA vasodilation.
Acute hydrocephalus occurs in 15-87% of patients with aneurysmal SAH. Acute
hydrocephalus is usually managed by external ventricular drainage (EVD) or lumbar
drainage. Chronic hydrocephalus occurs in 8.9-48% of patients and is managed with
ventricular shunt placement.
Superficial siderosis is a condition caused by iron overload of pial membranes due to
chronic or repeated subarachnoid bleeding. Clinically, patients with superficial siderosis
present with sensorineural deafness and ataxia. On imaging, the iron causes hypointensity
on T2-weighted images outlining the affected sulci.
Imaging workup includes cranial and spinal imaging to evaluate for a source of bleeding.
Superficial siderosis: Two axial T2-weighted images show a thin hypointense interface at the junction of
the sulcal surfaces and the subarachnoid space (arrows) of the basal cisterns (left image) and the MCA
territory temporal lobes (right image).
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Neuro Brain: 681