PROSTATE DISEASE
Prostate artery embolization (PAE)
Prostate artery embolization (PAE) is a safe and effective treatment for benign prostatic
hyperplasia. PAE is recommended for patients with moderate to severe symptoms of urinary
obstruction.
PAE causes ischemic necrosis of the prostate gland which in turn results in gland volume
reduction, thereby improving symptoms.
Preprocedural cross-sectional imaging is usually done to assess internal iliac artery anatomy.
The prostate artery origin is highly variable.
Common origin of prostate artery includes: Superior vesical artery, internal pudendal artery, obturator
artery, or from the internal iliac artery directly.
Procedural steps:
Patients are treated with antibiotics and anti-inflammatory, medications during the procedure and
recovery.
Access can be performed from common femoral or radial artery approach.
From the femoral approach, the contralateral internal iliac artery is catheterized and catheter is positioned
in the proximal internal iliac artery.
Then, an angiogram is performed and the prostate artery is selected with a microcatheter. Prostate artery
angiogram is performed to evaluate for prostate opacification and for collateral vessels.
To avoid potential non-target embolization, superselective catheterization or coil embolization of
anastomoses may be performed.
Embolization is performed until near stasis. Angiogram is repeated to document slow or absence of flow.
Ipsilateral internal iliac artery is selected and procedure is repeated.
Common minor complications include hematuria, nematospermia, and dysuria.
Recent randomized control trial comparing PAE to TURP showed that International Prostate
Symptom Score (IPSS) did not differ significantly between patient groups at 12 weeks, with
significantly lower adverse events and blood loss after PAE.
ADRENAL VEIN SAMPLING
Adrenal vein sampling can be performed to determine laterality or diagnose adrenal
hyperplasia in the setting of hyperaldosteronism.
The procedure can be performed either with simultaneous left and right sampling or
sequentially sampling the right and left.
A Renal Double Curve (RDC) catheter is helpful for selecting the adrenal vein.
IR: 645