Thyroglossal duct cyst (TDC)
Infected thyroglossal duct cyst: Sagittal (left image) and axial enhanced CT in an intubated 13-month-old show
at thick-walled peripherally enhancing cystic structure (arrows) in the midline, inferior to the mylohyoid.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
A thyroglossal duct cyst (TDC) represents persistence of the thyroglossal duct. The
thyroglossal duct follows the midline descent of the embryonic thyroid gland from the base
of the tongue (foramen cecum) to its normal position in the neck. Most thyroglossal duct
cysts present in childhood as an enlarging neck mass which elevates with tongue protrusion.
The majority of TDCS (65%) are infrahyoid, the rest found at the level of the hyoid or above.
Most TDCS are midline, but they may occur slightly off midline, especially when infrahyoid.
Thyroid carcinoma (papillary type) is a rare complication seen in 1% of TDCS.
Lingual thyroid
Lingual thyroid is ectopic thyroid tissue that has incompletely descended during embryologic
development and remains at the floor of the mouth. Usually, the ectopic gland is the only
functioning thyroid tissue, SO the neck should be evaluated to confirm lack of normal gland.
Lingual thyroid is much more common in females.
Lingual thyroid is susceptible to standard thyroid pathology, including thyroiditis and cancer.
Lymphatic malformations
Lymphatic malformations are congenital abnormalities that result when the embryologic
lymphatics fail to connect to developing veins. There are three types of ymphatic
malformations, classified by the size of the intra-lesional cystic spaces.
Cystic hygroma is the most common type of lymphatic malformation, the majority being
present at birth and associated with chromosomal anomalies including Turner and Down
syndromes. A cystic hygroma features large ymphatic spaces. The most common location is
in the posterior triangle of the neck.
Cavernous lymphangioma has smaller lymphatic spaces than a cystic hygroma, while a
capillary lymphangioma has the smallest cystic spaces.
Neuro Head & Neck: 838