Choledochal cyst/Caroli disease
Choledochal cysts (including Caroli disease) represent saccular or fusiform dilation of bile
ducts, which may be segmental or diffuse. The Todani classification of choledochal cysts is
discussed further in the gastrointestinal imaging section.
Gallbladder hydrops
Gallbladder hydrops is a pathologically distended gallbladder, usually associated with
infection or a systemic inflammatory process such as Kawasaki disease.
SOLID LIVER/BILIARY MASSES
Pediatric liver lesions can be categorized by age groups, with children aged 0-3 years
presenting with nemangoendomelome, nepatoblastoma or mesenchymal hamartoma;
children over age 5 with HCC and undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma. Metastatic liver
tumors, most commonly from Wilms tumor or neuroblastoma, can present at any age.
Terminology of "hemangioma" in pediatric radiology
Classification of pediatric vascular malformations and neoplasms
= vascular neoplasm
= vascular malformation
High flow?
Infantile hemangiomal
AVM/AVF
hemangibendothelioma
Low flow?
Venous
malformation
Lymphatic malformation
Pediatric vascular anomalies can be divided into vascular neoplasms and vascular
malformations, where neoplasms feature new cell growth and malformations feature
disorganized vasculature without cell growth.
Pediatric vascular anomalies can also be classified physiologically as high-flow or low-flow
lesions. High-flow vascular malformations include arteriovenous malformations (AVM)
and arteriovenous fistulas (AVF), while low-flow vascular malformations include venous
malformations and ymphatic malformations.
The term "hemangioma" is a common source of confusion. In particular, the term "hepatic
hemangioma" is often used to describe multiple unrelated vascular lesions including
infantile hemangioma, potentially malignant emangoendotnelomas and benign venous
malformations.
The common adult hepatic "hemangioma" is actually a venous malformation in the
classification above. Similarly, the soft tissue "hemangiomas" of Maffucci syndrome are also
venous malformations.
Infantile hemangioma and emangoendotelioma discussed on the next page, are high-
flow vascular neoplasms. emangoendotnelomas have the potential to metastasize.
Peds: 1141