In addition to the basicervical region, the intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric regions are
also extra-capsular.
Although there are many classifications for various regions of proximal femur fractures in
the orthopedic literature, these have shown to have generally poor inter-reader agreement.
Instead, a simplified Classification as proposed in this text can concisely describe the
relevant findings and accurately predict the appropriate treatment.
Hip dislocation and femoral head fractures
Frontal radiograph of the pelvis
Axial CT
Posterior hip dislocation, with femoral head fracture and posterior acetabular wall fracture:
Frontal radiograph of the pelvis shows a right posterior hip dislocation, with the femoral head displaced in the
typical superior position. Note internal rotation of the femur, with obscuration of the lesser trochanter (yellow
arrow). There is a posterior acetabular fracture (red arrow), partially obscured by the trauma board artifact.
CT confirms a small posterior acetabular wall fracture (red arrow) and a small femoral head fracture in the
region of the fovea (blue arrow).
The vast majority (-90%) of hip fractures are due to high-energy trauma with posterior
displacement of the femur, which is typically positioned superiorly.
The femur is typically positioned in internal rotation and flexion. The internal rotation of the femur causes
decreased conspicuity of the lesser trochanter, which is rotated behind the medial femoral cortex.
The dislocated femoral head may appear: smaller than the normal side due to AP radiographic technique
and magnification effect.
Femoral head fractures are most commonly associated with posterior hip dislocations or
gunshot wounds. Isolated femoral head fractures are uncommon.
Overview of proximal femur fractures
Excepting femoral head fractures,
proximal femur fractures can
be divided into 4 sites: Femoral
neck (intracapsular); and
basicervical, intertrochanteric, and
Femoral neck:
subtrochanteric extracapsular).
Nondisplacedlvalgus impacted
Displaced/varus: angulated
Femoral neck fractures can be
Basicervical
nondisplaced (equivalent to valgus
impaction) or displaced (equivalent
Intertrochanteric:
to varus).
Stable
Unstable
Intertrochanteric fractures can
Subtrochanteric
be stable (single fracture line) or
unstable.
MSK: 1034