MALIGNANCIES OF THE SINONASAL TRACT AND ANTERIOR SKULL BASE
Overview of sinonasal and anterior skull base malignancies
The most common malignant neoplasm in the sinonasal tract is squamous cell carcinoma,
but this histology is not as overwhelming of a majority as in other mucosal sites of the upper
aerodigestive tract. There are a wide variety of other malignancies.
Sinonasal epithelial cancers:
Squamous cell carcinoma (most common).
Adenoid cystic carcinoma.
Non-salivary-type adenocarcinoma.
Sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma (SNUC).
Sinonasal neuroendocrine carcinoma (SNEC).
Nonepithelial sinonasal cancers:
Lymphoma (most common).
Extramedullary plasmacytoma.
Olfactory neuroblastoma.
Sarcomas.
Mucosal melanoma.
Most of the various sinonasal malignancies have nonspecific imaging appearances and it
is usually not possible to predict the histology with confidence. The role of imaging lies
in localizing the tumor and evaluating the extent of disease, which affects the optimal
treatment approach.
Sinonasal malignancies are usually aggressive masses that cause extensive bony destruction.
Internal contrast enhancement, though often heterogeneous, distinguishes neoplasms from inflammatory
lesions such as hypertrophic mucosa, polyps, or obstructed secretions/mucocele.
Owing to high cellularity, many of these malignancies have intermediate intensity ("evil gray") on T2-
weighted images and more restricted diffusion.
Important findings to describe include the presence of perineural tumor spread, crossing the
anterior skull base into the intracranial compartment, and extension into the orbit.
Perineural tumor spread appears as nerve thickening and enhancement, obliteration of perineural fat
pads, and/or enlargement of neural foramina/canals.
Intracranial involvement may appear as nodular dural thickening or vasogenic edema in the brain.
Orbital invasion most commonly occurs through the lamina papyracea, which is the weakest orbital wall.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common sinonasal malignancy, most commonly
affecting the maxillary sinus.
Major risk factors for sinonasal squamous cell carcinoma are smoking and human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma is the most common sinonasal tumor of minor salivary gland
origin, most commonly affecting the maxillary sinus.
Adenoid cystic carcinomas have the highest risk of perineural spread. Those in the sinonasal
tract most commonly affect the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V,).
Adenocarcinoma
Sinonasal adenocarcinomas arise from surface epithelial glands, most commonly in the nasal
cavity and ethmoid air cells, and are divided into intestinal-type and nonintestinal-type.
Intestinal-type adenocarcinoma is strongly associated with occupational wood dust
exposure.
Neuro Head & Neck: 765