Full-thickness rotator cuff tear
-
Full-thickness rotator cuff tear: Coronal proton-density (left image) and sagittal fat-saturated proton-density
(right image) conventional MRI demonstrates complete discontinuity of the supraspinatus tendon with
the tendon retracted proximally (yellow arrow). There is al large effusion, demonstrating continuity of the
glenohumeral joint and the subacroma/subdetold bursa (red arrows). Susceptibility artifact is present in the
humeral head, consistent with prior rotator cuff repair.
Case courtesy Kirstin M. Small, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Ai full-thickness rotator cuff tear is seen on MR arthrography when fluid injected into
the glenohumeral joint extends into the subacroma/subdetod bursa. In the absence
of injected gadolinium, a full-thickness tear can be diagnosed if abnormal signal extends
through the fibers of the tendon. A gap in the tendon is almost always present.
Similar to partial tears, the supraspinatus is most commonly torn.
Approximately 30-40% of supraspinatus tears are also associated with a tear of the
infraspinatus.
The infraspinatus is rarely torn in isolation; however isolated infraspinatus tears can be seen in the setting
of posterior instability. The posterior capsule and labrum should be carefully evaluated in such cases.
A chronic full-thickness rotator cuff tear due to rheumatoid arthritis has a classic imaging
appearance. The humeral head migrates superiorly and may articulate with the acromion in
severe cases.
Full-thickness rotator cuff tears are classified by the length of the affected tendon/muscle,
ranging from small (<1 cm) to massive (>5 cm).
Rotator cuff atrophy
Atrophy of the rotator cuff is most commonly due to chronic rotator cuff tear. Fatty
degeneration may occur within 4 weeks of injury and is usually irreversible. The extent of
muscle degeneration correlates with outcome following surgical repair. The degree of fatty
infiltration of the rotator cuff muscles should be routinely assessed in the sagittal plane. The
degree of fatty replacement can be graded with the Goutallier classification:
Grade 0: Normal muscle, no fat.
Grade 3: Fatty infiltration, equal muscle and fat.
Grade 1: Muscle contains a few fatty streaks.
Grade 4: Fatty infiltration, more fat than muscle.
Grade 2: Fatty infiltration, more muscle than fat.
Less commonly, rotator cuff atrophy may be secondary to denervation atrophy,
subsequently discussed. Denervation atrophy is usually associated with a paralabral cyst.
MSK: 1050