Film optical density (OD)
Film optical density (OD) = logio( o/, - 0g,fndlden/transmited light intensity)
and characteristic curves
OD of 1 - 10% photons transmitted through film
OD of 2 - 1% transmitted
OD of 3 - 0.1% transmitted
Film "looks good" if the average OD is "1.5. This occurs after approximately 5
yGy photons hit the film/screen.
A characteristic curve ogarithmically plots the relationship between radiation
exposure (air kerma) and film optical density.
The toe is the low-exposure region and the shoulder is the high exposure region. Fog is the
baseline low-level darkening of film that occurs in the absence of radiation exposure.
Latitude is the range of air kerma with satisfactory film density. A high-
latitude film is ideal for imaging body parts with a wide variation of X-ray
transmission (e.g., a chest radiograph). A high-contrast (low-latitude) film is
ideal for accentuating image contrast in tissues with low subject contrast (e.g.,
mammography).
Gamma is steepest part of curve;
Effect of latitude on characteristic
gradient is average steepness:
curve:
3
shoulder
3
high-contrast
(mammo)
high-latitude,
D 2.
(cxr)
S
1
toe
base + fog - 0.2 OD
log(exposure)
log(exposure)
Digital detectors
lonization chamber: High-pressure Xe (k-edge 35 kev): Used for measuring
radiation, not for imaging.
All except Xe are Solid
Photostimulable phosphor: Barium fluorohalide (BaFBr); used in computed
State detectors.
radiography.
Read out with red laser light (emits blue light).
Dynamic range is 10,000:1 (vs. 40:1 for screen-film).
Can be used with air kerma <0.1 yGy to 1000 MGy.
Csl and Selenium used
Scintillator: Cesium iodide (Csl); note that Csl also used as input phosphor in an
without cassette.
image intensifier.
Indirect: Absorbed X-rays first converted to light, which is then stored as charge.
Advantage: K-edge 30-ish, good at absorbing X-rays.
Disadvantage: Light spreads out - blur
Photoconductor: (Selenium)
Direct: Absorbed X-rays directly converted to charge.
Advantage: No light spreading, very: sharp.
Disadvantage: K-edge 13, poor X-ray absorber at standard radiography keV.
Used in digital mammography.
Physics: 1206