Left superior intercostal vein (LSIV)
The left superior intercostal vein (LSIV) is a normal vein that is not often seen on
radiography. When visible, the LSIV produces the aortic nipple, appearing as a small round
shadow to the left of the aortic knob on the frontal radiograph.
The LSIV may be dilated as a collateral pathway in SVC obstruction.
RADIOGRAPHIC LOCALIZATION OF A MEDIASTINAL MASS
Detection of an anterior mediastinal mass
Deformation of the anterior junction line suggests a prevascular mediastinal mass. However,
since the anterior junction line is not always seen, it is more common to infer the anterior
location of a mass by preservation of the posterior lines in the presence of a mass.
The hilum overlay sign is present on the frontal view if hilar vessels are visualized through
the mass. It indicates that the mass cannot be in the visceral mediastinum. The mass may be
anterior (more likely) or posterior.
Anterior mediastinal mass: Frontal radiograph shows a right mediastinal mass with silhouetting of the right
heart border. The right pulmonary artery is visible through the mass (arrows), representing the hilum overlay
sign and indicating that the mass is not in the middle mediastinum. Lateral radiograph shows the mass in the
retrosternal clear space, confirming its anterior mediastinal location. This was a teratoma.
Obliteration of the retrosternal clear space on the lateral radiograph is direct sign of
prevascular mediastinal location.
Detection of a middle mediastinal mass
Distortion of the azygoesophageal recess, distortion of the posterior junction line,
paratracheal stripes, or convexity of the AP window suggests a visceral compartment
mediastinal mass.
Displacement of the descending aortic stripe: Frontal chest radiograph (left) shows lateral displacement
and bowing of the left para-aortic interface (arrows). Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows a nonenhancing
homogeneous mass (arrow) effacing the esophagus. Although extremely rare, this was a liposarcoma.
Detection of a posterior mediastinal mass
Distortion or displacement of the paraspinal lines suggests paravertebral disease.
Chest: 73