STROKE
IMAGING OF STROKE
Determine potential candidate for therapy
The goal of stroke imaging is to determine who would benefit from therapy.
The goal of stroke therapy is to restore perfusion to the brain.
In the appropriate patients, intravenous or intra-arterial thrombolysis, performed most
commonly with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA, alteplase), can improve outcomes.
However, there is risk of fatal hemorrhage in patients inappropriately selected for therapy.
The exact exclusion criteria to administer tPA varies among institutions.
The American Heart Association (AHA) and American Stroke Association (ASA) published
guidelines for early management of adults with ischemic stroke (Stroke, 2019) and
established recommendations for imaging and treatment of acute stroke.
All patients with suspected acute: stroke should receive emergency brain imaging prior to initiation of
any thrombolytic therapy to evaluate for intracerebral hemorrhage. Both noncontrast CT and MRI, when
gradient echo sequences are used, are effective in ruling out intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) prior to tPA
administration. In many patients, the diagnosis of ischemic stroke can be made on the basis of clinical
presentation and noncontrast head CT alone.
In patients with unclear last known normal, MRI can be useful in identifying diffusion-positive, FLAIR-
negative lesions to select patients who may benefit from IV tPA (K4.5 hours from symptom recognition).
Advanced imaging including CT angiogram with perfusion or MR angiogram with diffusion-weighted
imaging with or without MR perfusion is recommended for selecting candidates for mechanical
thrombectomy in the late window (26 hours after last known normal).
In patients being considered for mechanical thrombectomy, imaging of extracranial carotid and vertebral
arteries is reasonable for determining patient eligibility and for endovascular procedural planning.
Some institutions add additional exclusion criteria for administration of intravenous tPA,
although these additional criteria are not a part of the AHA guidelines:
Individuals with a large (greater than 1/3 MCA1 territory) infarct may be excluded from IV tPA.
Occlusion of the distal internal carotid artery and proximal MCA and ACA (a T-shaped occlusion) may
preclude treatment with IV tPA.
Absence of a penumbra (discussed below) of salvageable brain that represents at least 20% of the region
of abnormal perfusion may preclude treatment with IV tPA.
Perfusion stroke imaging
Perfusion imaging with CT angiogram or MR angiogram is recommended in patients
presenting between 6 and 24 hours after last-known normal with suspected large vessel
occlusion (LVO) in the anterior circulation who may benefit from mechanical thrombectomy.
LVO is defined as thrombosis involving the intracranial internal carotid artery (ICA) or the M1 segment of
the MCA. Some clinical trials also included ACA and/or M2 occlusion.
Two randomized trials (DAWN and DEFUSE 3) have shown a benefit in revascularization
of patients with acute ischemic stroke with LVO presenting beyond 6 hours of last known
normal using diffusion or perfusion imaging selection parameters.
Perfusion imaging parameters are used to quantify the core and penumbra. However,
diffusion-weighted imaging is the gold standard for quantifying core size.
The infarct core is the hypoperfused tissue with low cerebral blood flow which would not be salvageable
regardless of subsequent reperfusion.
The ischemic penumbra is the tissue "at risk" which has the potential to recover if perfusion is achieved.
Neuro Brain: 673