OVARIAN NEOPLASMS
Ovarian neoplasms include a large group of benign and malignant tumors that can be
classified based on where they originate in the ovary. 80% of ovarian masses are benign.
The three histologic types of primary ovarian neoplasm include epithelial neoplasm, germ
cell tumor, and sex cord-stromal tumor.
Surface epithelial tumors account for 70% of ovarian neoplasms overall and >90% of ovarian
cancers.
Germ cell tumors include mature cystic teratomas (dermoid) and dysgerminomas. Struma
ovarii is a subtype of teratoma that is composed of mature, functioning thyroid tissue.
Sex cord-stromal tumors include fibroma, thecoma, and fibrothecoma.
Meigs syndrome is the triad of benign ovarian fibroma, ascites, and right pleural effusion.
Tumors containing thecal cells produce estrogen and may cause endometrial carcinoma.
The Ovarian-Adnexal Reporting and Data System (O-RADS) provides risk stratification for
ovarian and adnexal lesions on ultrasound and MRI. It divides lesions into five categories
from normal ovary (1) to high risk (>50% chance of malignancy based on ultrasound, or
90% risk of malignancy based on MRI).
Dermoid cyst (mature cystic teratoma)
Dermoid cyst: Grayscale ultrasound image of the right ovary (left image) shows a complex ovarian cyst with
a densely echogenic, shadowing focus centrally representing the Rokitansky nodule (arrow). Color Doppler
shows the dot-dash sign, echogenic shadowing, and no significant internal Doppler flow.
Dermoid cyst, also called a mature cystic teratoma, is the most common ovarian neoplasm.
Technically, a teratoma contains all three primitive germ cell layers, while a dermoid cyst
may contain only two. In general use, however, these terms are interchangeable.
Malignant transformation is very rare and typically occurs in postmenopausal patients.
Another rare complication is intraperitoneal rupture leading to acute peritonitis.
A dermoid cyst can act as a lead point for adnexal torsion particularly when large (>4 cm).
The classic ultrasound appearance of a dermoid cyst is a complex ovarian cyst with an
echogenic Rokitansky nodule, which is a solid nodule projecting into the cyst cavity, from
which hair or teeth may arise. The imaging appearance can be variable, however, and other
common imaging features include:
The dot-dash pattern describes interrupted echogenic lines thought to be produced by keratin fibers.
The tip of the iceberg sign describes obscuration of the deeper contents due to high-attenuation material.
CT and MRI typically show a heterogeneous unilocular cystic structure with coarse
calcification, corresponding to sebaceous material, hair follicles, and fat. A Rokitansky
nodule may or may not be seen.
Less commonly, a dermoid cyst may appear as a solid hyperdense or fat-density mass.
GU: 319