BIOPSY
Basic principles of bone and soft tissue biopsy
Indications for biopsy include need for pathologic diagnosis of an indeterminate or
aggressive lesion, confirmation of and/or molecular analysis of suspected metastatic
disease, and need for microbial analysis in imaging-confirmed osteomyelitis.
It is important to perform a thorough imaging workup prior to biopsy planning, in order to
best determine the pre-test probability, target the highest yield portion of the lesion, and
avoid unnecessary biopsy.
As an example of the importance of risk-stratifying lesions on imaging prior to biopsy, if complete imaging
workup showed an aggresive-appearing lesion with FDG uptake on PET, then a negative or nondiagnostic
pathology report would not be concordant, and repeat biopsy should be performed.
In contrast, if complete imaging assessment showed an indeterminate but less-aggressive appearing lesion
(such as with minimal enhancement and no or low-level uptake on PET), then an indeterminate pathology
report could possibly be followed by short-interval repeat imaging.
Absolute contraindications are not common but include an inaccessible percutaneous
approach, and need to traverse a soft tissue infection to target a non-infected lesion.
Close consultation with orthopedic oncologists is required when planning biopsy approach,
especially for solitary lesions that may ultimately be resected. This collaborative planning
ensures that the biopsy tract can be resected at time of surgery and reduces the risk of
tumor tract seeding and contamination of additional compartments.
Special considerations
For thigh biopsies (bone or soft tissues), it is critical not to traverse the rectus femoris
muscle (unless a lesion of the rectus femoris is being targeted). This is because rectus is
one of the primary extensors of the leg traversing both the hip and knee joints, and if it is
traversed the rectus may need to be sacrificed to reduce the chance of tumor tract seeding.
For biopsy of weight-bearing bones of the lower extremity (such as the femur or tibia), it
may be necessary for the patient to be on crutches with touch-down weight-bearing, in
consultation with the treating orthopedic surgeon.
Soft tissue biopsies
Soft tissue biopsy: Contrast-enhanced MRI shows a heterogeneously enhancing mass in the adductor
compartment of the left thigh (arrows). Pre-procedural color Doppler ultrasound demonstrates the mass, with
no vascularity along the expected needle tract. Intraprocedural image (right image) demonstrates the biopsy
needle (arrow) in the center of the mass. Pathology was a cellular myxoma.
Soft tissue mass biopsies are generally performed with a coaxial spring-loaded biopsy
device. For highest yield, the most avidly enhancing portion (or most avid focus of FDG
uptake if a PET was performed) should be targeted as long as it is safe to do SO.
The majority of musculoskeletal soft tissue biopsies can be performed by ultrasound,
although CT is often a reasonable modality as well.
MSK: 1082