Persistent sciatic artery
DA
Persistent: sciatic artery: Axial CT angiogram (left image) shows an enlarged vessel in the left gluteal region
(yellow arrow) between the ischial tuberosity and the gluteus maximus. Two small vessels are present in the
left inguinal region (red arrows) instead of a normal common femoral artery.
Three-dimensional. volume-rendered reconstruction from the same study (right image) shows an enlarged left
internal iliac artery, which continues distally as the persistent sciatic artery (yellow arrows). This patient also
has a left femoral artery, although decreased in caliber (red arrow).
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
A persistent sciatic artery is a very rare vascular anomaly where the fetal sciatic artery
persists to supply the majority of blood supply to the leg.
The persistent sciatic artery arises from the internal iliac artery (usually from the inferior
gluteal artery) and continues distally to the popliteal artery. A rudimentary femoral artery
may be present.
A persistent sciatic artery may predispose to aneurysm formation.
THROMBOEMBOLIC AND ATHEROSCLEROTIC LOWER EXTREMITY DISEASE
Chronic arterial occlusive disease
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) shares risk factors with coronary artery disease, including
smoking, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, lack of exercise, and family history.
Clinically, chronic peripheral atherosclerosis presents initially with claudication, which can
progress to ischemic rest pain or tissue loss in severe cases.
Claudication is usually first treated conservatively, with risk factor control, exercise, aspirin,
and/or cilostazol (a platelet-aggregation inhibitor with vasodilator action).
The most common locations for lower extremity atherosclerotic stenoses include the
common iliac arteries, superficial femoral artery, popliteal artery, tibioperoneal trunk, and
origins of the tibial arteries.
The Rutherford classification clinically categorizes chronic limb ischemia. Category 0 is
asymptomatic, category 1 is mild claudication, categories 2-3 are moderate to severe
ischemia, category 4 is ischemic rest pain, and categories 5-6 are minor or major tissue loss,
respectively. Revascularization should not be attempted if the limb is not viable.
Vascular: 581