Fetal manifestations of meconium
Meconium ileus is bowel obstruction caused by impacted meconium in a fetus with cystic
fibrosis.
Meconium peritonitis is peritoneal inflammation secondary to in utero bowel perforation
(due to atresia or unknown cause) and resultant spillage of meconium into the peritoneal
cavity. This leads to chemical peritonitis with ascites, peritoneal adhesions and, ultimately,
dystrophic calcifications.
Meconium pseudocyst is a cystic abdominal structure, often with peripheral calcification,
representing a walled-off bowel perforation. It is a sequela of meconium peritonitis.
Hyperechoic small bowel
Hyperechoic or echogenic bowel is a nonspecific finding that is associated with Down
syndrome, TORCH infection, cystic fibrosis, and swallowing of blood products in the amniotic
fluid. It may also be associated with intrauterine growth restriction.
If the bowel is only mildly echogenic (less echogenic than bone) and no mass effect is
present, this appearance may represent a normal variant.
Omphalocele
Omphalocele: Transverse ultrasound through
the fetal abdomen shows herniation of intra-
abdominal content including the stomach (yellow
arrow) outside of the anterior abdominal wall,
covered by a peritoneal membrane (red arrows).
The umbilical cord (blue arrow) inserts onto the
herniated sac.
Omphalocele, the most common anterior abdominal wall defect, is a midline defect with
herniation of intra-abdominal contents resulting from disruption of the normal physiologic
first trimester bowel herniation process. The herniated bowel is covered by a peritoneal
membrane.
The key to differentiate omphalocele from gastroschisis is the umbilical cord insertion site. In
omphalocele, the umbilical cord inserts centrally at the base of the herniated sac.
When small, omphaloceles may contain only bowel. Larger omphaloceles may also contain
liver. The presence of liver in the omphalocele carries a better prognosis.
Omphalocele is associated with other anomalies in 50-75% of cases, including cardiac
anomalies, trisomies, and Beckwth-wiedemann syndrome (a congenital overgrowth
syndrome characterized by omphalocele, macroglossia, hemihypertrophy, and
visceromegaly). Associated anomalies and aneuploidy are more likely if liver is not involved.
Gastroschisis
Gastroschisis: Transverse ultrasound through the
fetal abdomen shows loops of bowel herniating
outside of the anterior abdominal wall (yellow
arrows), lateral to the normal midline cord insertion
(red arrow). The bowel loops have a lobulated
contour because there is no peritoneal covering.
Obstetrics: 360