MUSCULOSKELETAL INTERVENTIONS
ARTHROGRAPHY
General principals
Arthrography can be performed for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes.
In diagnostic arthrography, contrast is injected into the joint to assess the intra-articular
structures, such as cartilage, menisci, labra, ligaments, and to evaluate for intra-articular
bodies. Post-arthrogram MR or CT is almost always performed.
For MR arthrography, a 1:100 or 1:200 dilution of Badolnium-containing contrast is made. For instance,
0.1 mL of gadolinium contrast diluted in 10 mL of normal saline is a 1:100 dilution. This can be admixed
with iodinated contrast (at our institution in a 1:1 ratio) to be visualized under fluoroscopy.. Alternatively,
the gadolinium-saline mixture can be injected after a test injection of iodinated contrast to confirm intra-
articular position.
For therapeutic joint injections, steroid and anesthetic medications are injected into the
joint under imaging guidance (fluoroscopy, ultrasound, or rarely CT). Steroids are thought
to reduce pain by reducing intra-articular inflammation but do not change the course of
osteoarthritis, and several recent studies have questioned their effectiveness. Therapeutic
injections should be limited to once every six months or once every three months in cases of
debilitating pain with prior effective steroid injection.
Complications of any arthrogram could include infection, hematoma formation, allergic
reaction, or mechanical injury from the needle to structures such as tendons, menisci/labra,
ligaments, and cartilage.
Additional steroid-specific complications could include progression of osteoarthritis/
subchondral collapse from steroid administration, and systemic steroid side effects (e.g.,
elevated blood glucose, increased appetite, insomnia).
Local anesthetic is toxic to chondrocytes ex-vivo. Ropivacaine is thought to be the least
chondrotoxic, and bupivacaine the most chondrotoxic.
There are many variations on safe procedures to perform arthrography, but a few steps
should always be performed:
Patient consent.
Procedural time-out: confirming identification, procedure, laterality, and allergies.
Skin marking.
Sterile preparation and maintenance of sterile field throughout procedure.
At least one image showing intra-articular contrast should be saved.
In patients allergic to iodinated contrast, air or gadolinium can be used.
Dose reduction in fluoroscopic procedures
One should always maintain the ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principle for
radiation exposure in fluoroscopic procedures.
Decrease the imaging parameters, by reducing the mA and kVp as low as possible. Many
fluoroscopic machines have a "low-dose" mode that should be utilized routinely unless
there is a specific reason to turn it off (such as tricky anatomy or unclear pattern of contrast
opacification).
Decrease the number of images taken. This can be done in three ways: by taking fewer
images, by pressing the pedal only briefly, and by reducing the frames obtained per second.
This last method is often called "pulse" mode, which should always be used unless there is a
specific problem-solving need.
MSK: 1080