MULTIPLE GESTATIONS AND PLACENTATION
The placentation type (chorionicity and amnionicity) substantially affects the risk for
pregnancy complications and influences how closely the pregnancy should be followed. The
placentation should always be stated when first describing a multiple gestation.
The zygosity (number of fertilized eggs) cannot be determined by ultrasound. Monozygotic
twins can have any placentation type, depending on when the developing zygote splits.
Dizygotic twins, however, are always d'amniotic/dichorionic, and only dizygotic twins can be
different sexes.
Monozygotic ("identical") twins arise from a single egg fertilized with a single sperm.
Dizygotic ("fraternal") twins arise from two individually fertilized eggs.
For the purposes of imaging and pregnancy management, chorionicity and amnionicity are
utilized rather than zygosity.
Chorionicity is the number of placentas.
Monochorionic twins share a single placenta.
Dichorionic twins have separate placentas.
Amnionicity is the number of amnions.
Monoamniotic twins share a single amniotic sac and must therefore share the placenta.
Diamniotic twins each have a separate amniotic sac and may or may not share their placenta.
The number of amniotic sacs usually correlates with the number of yolk sacs.
By convention, chorionicity is stated before the amnionicity when stating the placentation.
For instance, the abbreviation mono/di refers to monocmomonc/demnote twins.
Overview of complications by placentation type
The more that the twins share, the greater the risk of complications.
Di/di twins have an increased risk of premature delivery and low birth weight compared to
singleton gestations.
Mono/di twins have an increased risk of complications related to a shared placenta,
including twin-twin transfusion, acardiac twin syndrome, and twin embolization.
In addition to being at risk for the same complications as mono/di twins, mono/mono twins
are also at risk for cord entanglement and being conjoined.
Early counting of multiple gestations
If two separate gestational sacs are identified, the placentation is di/di. The zygosity is
indeterminate.
Although dizygotic twins are always di/di, early splitting of a single fertilized egg can also lead to di/di
monozygotic twins.
If a single gestational sac contains two yolk sacs, the placentation is mono/di, and the twins
are monozygotic.
Dizygotic ("fraternal") twins
dizygotic twins
Dizygotic twins result when two
eggs are each fertilized by a
different sperm.
Dizygotic twins are always
dichorionit/dlamniotic.
dichorionic, diamniotic (100%)
Obstetrics: 333