Dose to general public
1 mSv/year, which is actually lower than the maximum dose of 5 mSv allowed
allowed by medical
to the fetus of a radiation worker.
radiation
Dose limits by body part
Eyes: 150 mSv/year
Everything else: 500 mSv/year
Occupational exposure
Max permissible effective dose = 50 mSv/year
(not pregnant)
Background radiation
Background radiation varies by location, but averages about 3 mSv/year
excluding medical radiation.
1 Gy (Sv) is required to double the mutation rate, SO 3 mSv = 0.003 Sv = 0.3% increased risk
of mutation above the baseline rate.
Radon exposure represents approximately 55% of background radiation. Radon
is an alpha emitter with a half-life of three days. Its parent radionuclide is
radium, with a half-life of 1600 years.
Effective dose = Absorbed dose * WR * W,
WR = 20 (T LET), and W, = 0.1 (only lung tissue irradiated)
Radon exposure is thought to cause -20,000 deaths/year.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (MRI) PHYSICS
MRI and
Although no controlled studies have been performed, MRI can be performed at any
pregnancy
stage of pregnancy. Gadolinium is contraindicated throughout pregnancy.
MRI quenching
Quenching causes loss of superconductivity of the MRI scanner magnet coils, which
releases helium. Helium displaces 0, - must evacuate emergently.
Fringe field
The fringe field surrounds the controlled access area and cannot exceed 5 Gauss
FDA regulates the
Static magnetic field strength >4T.
following MRI
Time-varying magnetic fields sufficient to produce severe discomfort or painful
parameters
stimulation.
Radiofrequency power deposition to produce core temperature increase of 1°C.
Acoustic noise levels >140 dB.
SAR
The specific absorption ration (SAR) characterizes the radiofrequency (RF) power
Specific absorption
absorbed per unit mass.
ratio
SAR is proportional to # images acquired per unit time and depends on patient
dimensions, RF waveform, tip angle, and coil type.
MRI noise
The acoustic noise produced by the MRI scanner is caused by vibrating gradient coils,
due to rapidly applied gradient magnetic fields.
Physics: 1214