Visceral artery aneurysm
Visceral artery aneurysm can occur anywhere, with splenic and hepatic artery aneurysms
amongst the most common types.
Splenic artery aneurysm
Splenic artery aneurysm is the most common visceral aneurysm. Multiparous females
and patients with portal hypertension are at increased risk of developing splenic artery
aneurysms. Splenic artery aneurysms have an increased risk of rupture during pregnancy.
A splenic artery pseudoaneurysm may be the result of trauma or pancreatitis.
Indications for treatment of a splenic artery aneurysm include presence of symptoms (such
as left upper quadrant pain), aneurysm size >2.5 cm, and prior to expected pregnancy.
Endovascular coil embolization is the preferred approach. In general coils are first placed
distal to the aneurysm neck (to exclude retrograde collateral flow), then placed proximally.
Proximal splenic embolization is less painful and better at preserving splenic function
because collateral blood supply can be preserved. Embolization should be performed in the
mid splenic artery between the dorsal pancreatic and pancreatica magna arteries to reduce
potential pancreatic complications such as ischemic pancreatitis. Distal embolization causes
more tissue necrosis and can be more painful.
Splenic artery aneurysm: Selective DSA angiogram of the splenic artery (left image) shows an outpouching of
contrast (arrow) in the proximal artery. Proximal coil embolization (right image) demonstrates resolution of the
active extravasation.
Hepatic artery aneurysm
Hepatic artery aneurysm is the second most common visceral aneurysm.
Indications for treatment of a visceral artery aneurysm include presence of symptoms (such
as pain), aneurysm size >2.5 cm, and prior to expected pregnancy.
Embolization of the right hepatic artery distal to the cystic artery (which arises from the
right hepatic artery) is preferred, as embolization proximal to the cystic artery increases the
risk of ischemic cholecystitis, which may be seen in up to 10% of cases.
RENAL ARTERY STENOSIS
Atherosclerosis is the most common cause of renal artery stenosis in older adults and tends
to affect the ostia (origin) of the renal arteries.
RAS resulting from atherosclerotic disease typically involves the ostium and proximal third of
the main renal artery.
The success of atherosclerotic RAS angioplasty is debatable. However, angioplasty + stenting
may be advocated in the setting of hemodynamically significant RAS, resistant hypertension,
deteriorating renal function, bilateral atherosclerotic RAS, unexplained CHF, and recurrent
episodes of flash pulmonary edema.
IR: 615