Obstruction due to internal hernia (continued)
Foramen of Winslow hernia: The foramen of Winslow is the communication between
the lesser sac and the greater peritoneal cavity. The key imaging features of a foramen of
Winslow hernia are dilated loops of bowel in the lesser sac and presence of mesentery and/
or bowel loops between the IVC and main portal vein.
Foramen of Winslow hernia: Axial (left image) and coronal (right image) T2-weighted MRI shows unusual
configuration of the right hemicolon (yellow arrows), which extends into the lesser sac through the foramen
of Winslow, displacing the stomach laterally (red arrows). There is no evidence of colonic wall thickening or
pericolonic edema.
Obstruction due to neoplasm
A mass intrinsic to the bowel or compression from an extrinsic mass may cause SBO. An
extrinsic mass is usually straightforward to diagnose by CT.
Although the presence of an intraluminal mass may be more difficult to detect on CT, clues
to the presence of an intrinsic mass include irregular bowel wall thickening and/or regional
ymphadenopathy.
Primary small bowel neoplasm causing intrinsic bowel obstruction may be due to
adenocarcinoma, GIST, and carcinoid. Metastatic causes of intrinsic bowel neoplasm include
melanoma, ovarian, and lung cancer. Melanoma is known to cause intussusception.
Lymphoma is generally a "soft" tumor and rarely causes obstruction. Aneurysmal dilatation
of the small bowel wall is a classic appearance, but presentation is highly variable.
Obstruction due to intussusception
Intussusception causing small bowel
obstruction:
Coronal contrast-enhanced CT
demonstrates a segmental jejunojejunal
intussusception (arrows), causing an
early or partial proximal small bowel
obstruction. This was a case of metastatic
melanoma (metastatic lesion not
visualized on this image).
While transient intussusceptions are a common incidental finding, an intussusception
causing obstruction should raise suspicion for an underlying lesion and prompt surgery.
Transient small bowel intussusceptions tend to be short segments without wall thickening
or upstream obstruction, while malignant intussusceptions involve longer segments with
associated wall thickening and upstream obstruction.
GI: 203