Management of the above high-risk lesions when identified at core needle biopsy is related
to the upstage rate. For example, the upstage rate for ADH is relatively high (up to 20%),
therefore surgical excision is recommended. The upstage rate for the other entities are still
under investigation, and therefore different institutions may recommend excision versus
surveillance.
Risk factors for developing breast cancer
The two most important risk factors for breast cancer are female sex and advancing age.
Inherited BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Women with an inherited mutation have greater than
50% chance (some believe as high as 80% chance) of developing breast cancer by age 80.
First degree relative with breast cancer. In contrast, a non-first degree relative with
postmenopausal breast cancer is not considered an increased risk.
Prior chest radiation for Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Prior biopsy result of one of the following high-risk lesions:
Atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH)
Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)
Atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH)
Flat epithelial aplasia (FEA)
Radial scar
Intraductal papilloma/atypical papilloma
Long-term estrogen exposure, such as early menarche, late menopause, late first
pregnancy, nulliparity, or obesity (through increased estrogen production by adipocytes).
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
DCIS represents carcinoma contained within the duct with an intact basement membrane
in place (once tumor cells have broken through the basement membrane invasive disease is
present). It represents the lowest stage of breast cancer, Stage 0.
DCIS is the most frequent occult cancer detected mammographically, accounting for
approximately 20% of new cancer diagnoses and usually presents mammographicaly as
calcifications. Much less frequently DCIS presents as mammographic asymmetry, mass or
architectural distortion. It is most often asymptomatic, but may present as nipple discharge,
nipple changes or infrequently as a palpable mass.
On MRI, a pattern of linear or segmental, clumped enhancement is suspicious for DCIS.
Pathologically, DCIS is graded as low, intermediate or high grade. High grade DCIS is more
likely to progress to invasive disease if not adequately treated.
Invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC)
Breast cancer is a diverse spectrum of disease with varying histopathology and prognosis.
The most common subtype of breast cancer is invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), representing
70-80% of cases. It often presents as a palpable mass, with the classic associated
mammographic appearance being an irregular mass with spiculated margins and associated
pleomorphic calcifications.
Basal-type breast carcinoma is a phenotype given to triple (ER, PR, and HER2/neu) negative
carcinomas due to gene underexpression. This phenotype includes various morphologic
types including medullary carcinoma and invasive carcinoma in the setting of BRCA1
mutation. Although these tumors are usually high grade, basal-like breast carcinomas have
been associated with favorable response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Breast: 370