Intussusception
Intussusception is caused by two telescoping bowel loops prolapsing into each other. The
most common location is ileocolic where the ileum prolapses into the colon.
Intussusception is common and classically presents with colicky abdominal pain, "currant
jelly stool," and a palpable right lower quadrant abdominal mass.
Most children between 3 months and 3 years old have idiopathic intussusceptions caused by
ymphoid hyperplasia from a preceding viral illness. In contrast, intussusception in newborns
and children older than 3 years should prompt evaluation for a pathologic lead point, which
may be an intestinal polyp, Meckel diverticulum (infants), or lymphoma (children).
Radiographs are nonspecific, but may show paucity of gas
or a soft tissue mass.
Ultrasound is the primary modality for diagnosis, which
shows a characteristic target or pseudokidney sign with
alternating layers of bowel wall and mesenteric fat.
Small bowel to small bowel intussusception is a common
incidental finding on ultrasound. They are often asymptomatic,
transient and self-resolving. In contrast, ileocolic intussusception
typically requires manual reduction. It is distinguished by
diameter >2.5 cm and the presence of internal mesenteric lymph Ilio-ileal intussusception: Left lower
nodes or fat.
quadrant ultrasound shows the
target. sign (arrows) with alternating
The differential diagnosis of bloody stool and thick-walled layers of bowel wall and interposed
bowel on ultrasound includes intussusception, colitis, and mesenteric fat.
much less commonly intramural hematoma (e.g., due to Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD,
trauma or Henoch-Schônlein purpura).
University of Virginia Health System.
The first-line treatment is reduction with an air or contrast enema. The choice of air or
contrast varies by institution, but air enemas are generally considered safer.
Intussusception reduction (same patient as the ultrasound above): Initial prone spot radiograph (left
image) from an air enema shows a mass in the right lower quadrant (arrows), which spontaneously
reduces after continued insufflation of air (right image).
A: surgeon should be present. IV antibiotics are sometimes, but not universally, administered.
A large-bore needle must be available to decompress a potential tension pneumoperitoneum, which may
cause fatal compression of the IVC if untreated.
A large enema tip should be used to prevent leakage, which may need to be taped to the skin.
Air should be insufflated up to 120 mmHg (between cries; reading during cries will be artificially high).
A: successful reduction will show rush of air into the small bowel.
The rule of 3's applies to hydrostatic reduction: up to 3 attempts can be performed, up to 3 minutes each.
If unsuccessful, the patient must go to surgery.
Contraindications to pneumatic reduction include peritonitis, pneumoperitoneum, and
septic shock.
Peds: 1128