Brain tumor recurrence versus radiation necrosis
Several nuclear imaging protocols have been described in the differentiation of tumor
recurrence versus radiation necrosis. Regardless of the radiotracer involved, fusion to MRI is
usually performed.
Thallium-201 generally accumulates in malignant gliomas and not in post-treatment
granulation tissue (i.e., thallium is not taken up by radiation necrosis). Thallium-201 uptake
requires a living cell and blood-brain barrier disruption. The degree of uptake can be graded
in comparison to the scalp activity:
Uptake <scalp is low; uptake between scalp and 2x scalp is moderate; and uptake >2x scalp is high.
PG4W 1Del light a Left
PG4W 1oei
SANFEZN SRMSSRATSE
Axial T1-weighted post-contrast MRI
SPECT thallium-201 (top image, with 4.4 mCi administered)
shows a left parietal resection cavity with and fused SPECT-MRI (bottom image) show thallium
an enhancing nodule (arrow) along the
uptake in the posteromedial aspect of the resection cavity
posteromedial aspect of the resection
correlating with the enhancing nodule seen on MRI (arrow).
cavity.
This pattern is suggestive of tumor recurrence.
Dual-phase F-18 FDG PET employs early and delayed imaging to evaluate a region of
suspected tumor recurrence versus radiation necrosis. PET scanning is performed at 1 hour
and 4 hours after the injection of the radiotracer. Dual phase PET has been shown to have
increased accuracy for the assessment of recurrence versus post-treatment changes in
metastatic disease compared to single-phase PET.
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID IMAGING
Radiotracer: Indium-111 DTPA
Indium-111 has a half-life of 67 hours.
In-111 DTPA is ideal for cerebrospinal fluid imaging because it is non-lipid soluble, not
metabolized, and has a long half-life (CSF imaging may span several days). It is administered
intrathecally by lumbar puncture.
Normally, radiotracer should reach the basal cisterns by 1 hour, the sylvian and anterior
interhemispheric cisterns by 2-6 hours, cerebral convexities by 12 hours, and the arachnoid
villi in the sagittal sinus by 24 hours.
Presence of radiotracer activity in the lateral ventricles is abnormal. Failure of radiotracer
ascent over the cerebral convexities at 24 hours is also abnormal.
Nucs: 455