MULTICOMPARTMENTAL ORBITAL MASSES
Lymphoma
Orbital lymphoma: Coronal (left) and axial noncontrast CT through the orbits shows left-sided proptosis and an
ill-defined, slightly hyperattenuating mass (arrows) in the left superior-lateral orbit. The mass conforms to the
shape of the globe, rather than deforming it. The left lacrimal gland is not separately identified.
Orbital ymphoproliferative lesions are a spectrum ranging from benign reactive ymphoid
hyperplasia to lymphoma. Most of these are ocular adnexal lymphomas (involving the
support structures of the eye as opposed to intraocular lymphoma).
Lymphoma is the most common primary orbital tumor in older adults, although it may also
be secondary to systemic disease.
The most common histology of orbital ymphoma is low-grade extranodal marginal zone
B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated ymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma).
Similar to the above inflammatory disorders, ymphoproliferative lesions can affect any
orbital structure as a mass or diffuse infiltration but are most commonly extraconal,
particularly involving the lacrimal gland.
Both ymphoproliferative and inflammatory masses tend to mold to the globe and other
orbital structures. However, compared to idiopathic orbital inflammation, lymphomas have
lower ADC values on MRI and clinically are unlikely to present with orbital pain.
Plexiform neurofibroma
Plexiform neurofibromas are the most common type of orbital neurofibroma and are almost
always associated with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
Orbital plexiform neurofibromas typically involve trigeminal nerve branches, extending
from the periorbital/preseptal soft tissues of the eyelid to the deep orbit, infiltrating both
extraconal and intraconal compartments.
On imaging, plexiform neurofibromas appear as infiltrative, serpentine masses with variable
contrast enhancement. Associated findings of NF1 may be seen on the orbital imaging study,
including sphenoid wing dysplasia, buphthalmos (enlarged globe), and optic nerve glioma.
Venolymphatic malformation (VLM)
Orbital venolymphatic (combined venous-lymphatic) malformations (VLM), previously called
lymphangiomas, are congenital slow-flow vascular malformations that present in children
and grow with the patient.
Orbital VLMs most commonly involve the extraconal compartment but may be found
anywhere in the orbit. A key diagnostic clue is transspatial location with the mass spanning
multiple compartments.
On imaging, orbital VLM appears as a multilocular cystic mass, often with complex internal
contents and fluid-fluid levels from prior nemorrhage. Enhancement is variable, though
typically peripheral and septal.
Neuro Head & Neck: 775