Overview of child with limp
A limp (abnormal gait pattern caused by pain) should be carefully evaluated and may be
secondary to trauma, septic arthritis, chronic fracture, avascular necrosis, or lymphoma.
Septic hip arthritis
Infection of the synovium and joint space is an orthopedic emergency as joint destruction
and growth arrest may occur without prompt washout and antibiotics.
Any hip effusion must be urgently aspirated to evaluate for septic arthritis.
The primary differential consideration for septic arthritis is aseptic transient synovitis, which
is a self-limited diagnosis of exclusion and typically seen in children 3-8 years old following a
viral infection. Less common causes of hip effusion and limp include hemarthrosis in trauma
or hemophilia (history is usually evident).
Septic arthritis is usually secondary to hematogenously seeded metaphyseal osteomyelitis
that breaks through the periosteum to infect the joint capsule. S. aureus is the most
common cause. The hip is the second most commonly affected joint, following the knee.
Plain film findings are not sensitive or reliable for evaluation of effusion, but include:
Displacement or distortion of gluteal or psoas fat planes. The gluteus medius and minimus insert on the
greater trochanter. The psoas inserts on the lesser trochanter.
Widening of the teardrop distance (space between the lateral margin of the pelvic teardrop and the
medial margin of the femoral head). The teardrop is the antero-inferior acetabulum.
Hip effusion: AP radiograph shows lateral displacement of the left gluteal fat plane (yellow arrows) and
subtle medial bowing of the psoas fat plane (red arrow). The teardrop distance (blue arrows) is not
widened, emphasizing the relative insensitivity of these radiographic findings to detect effusion.
Ultrasound is the imaging modality of choice. Both sides should be compared for symmetry.
The presence of internal echoes within an effusion does not have clinical significance.
x
Bilateral hip ultrasound in the same patient shows increased anechoic fluid in the left hip joint (right
panel; arrows) relative to the normal right hip. This child ended up having aseptic toxic synovitis, but the
radiographic and ultrasound findings are identical to septic arthritis.
Peds: 1167