Echinococcal disease
Hepatic echinococcosis is caused by ingestion of the eggs of Echinococcus granulosus, which
is endemic in the Mediterranean basin and associated with sheep-raising. Echinococcal eggs
can develop into hydatid cysts.
Hepatic echinococcus: Ultrasound (left image) shows a complex, primarily hypoechoic mass in the superior
aspect of the liver containing a hyperechoic undulating membrane (red arrow). Contrast-enhanced CT (right
image) shows ai fluid-attenuating cystic mass (yellow arrows) containing an undulating membrane (red arrow).
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women' 's Hospital.
On CT and MRI, a hydatid cyst is a well-defined hypoenhancing cystic mass featuring a
characteristic floating membrane or an associated daughter cyst. Peripheral calcification
may be seen on CT.
Classic ultrasound appearance is a large liver cyst with numerous peripheral daughter cysts.
A highly suggestive finding is the change in position of daughter cysts as the patient is repositioned.
The water-lily sign is an undulating membrane within the hydatid cyst.
Hydatid. sand is a fine sediment caused by separation of the membranes from the endocyst.
There is a theoretical risk of anaphylaxis with peritoneal spillage of cyst fluid, although
these are often biopsied and drained uneventfully. Medical treatment is albendazole or
mebendazole.
Amebic abscess
Amebic abscess is caused by Entamoeba histolytica. A near-universal presenting symptom is
pain, seen in 99% of patients. The most common location is near the dome of the right lobe.
On imaging, an amebic abscess is indistinguishable from a pyogenic abscess.
Antimicrobial therapy is usually sufficient treatment, and drainage is rarely necessary.
CYSTIC LIVER DISEASE
Imaging simple cysts
On all imaging modalities, simple hepatic cysts are characterized by a round or oval, well-
circumscribed, thin/nearly imperceptible wall. A few thin septa may be seen.
On ultrasound, a simple cyst is anechoic, shows posterior acoustic enhancement, and
demonstrates no internal vascularity on Doppler.
CT: shows homogeneous low attenuation (0-20 HU) and no contrast enhancement.
MRI shows low T1, high T2 signal intensity and no contrast enhancement.
GI: 118