Epidural lipomatosis (continued)
Epidural lipomatosis involves multiple vertebral levels and is typically seen posteriorly in the
thoracic spine (anterior displacing the thecal sac) and circumferentially in the lumbar spine
(creating a trefoil or Y-shaped contour of the thecal sac).
OSSIFICATION OF SPINAL LIGAMENTS
Ossification of the spinal ligaments is a group of conditions in which heterotopic bone
formation occurs within the anterior or posterior longitudinal ligaments, ligamentum
flavum, or ligamentum nuchae.
These conditions affect older adults. They are frequently assoclated/coexistent with each
other. They are distinct from but can coexist with degenerative spondylosis.
Patients are often asymptomatic, but ligamentous ossification can cause issues related to
stiffness or mass effect on surrounding structures.
Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL)
Ossification of the posterior longitudinal
ligament (OPLL):
The right image shows OPLL along the upper
to mid cervical spine (arrows). Note partially
visualized post-surgical changes of cervical
laminectomies and posterior instrumented
fusion, which were performed to decompress
the spinal stenosis caused by OPLL.
Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) is characterized by bone formation
along the posterior longitudinal ligament.
OPLL most frequently involves the cervical spine, followed by the thoracic spine.
OPLL contributes to spinal canal stenosis and may compress the anterior aspect of the cord.
Ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF)
Ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) is characterized by bone formation along the
ligamentum flavum.
OLF predominantly involves the thoracic spine.
OLF contributes to spinal canal stenosis and may compress the posterior aspect of the cord.
Ossification of the ligamentum nuchae (OLN)
Ossification of the nuchal ligament (OLN) is characterized by bone formation along the
midline ligament that spans the posterior cervical spine from the external occipital
protuberance to the C7 spinous process.
OLN is generally an incidental finding of no clinical significance.
Spine: 894