OVERVIEW OF MAMMOGRAPHIC CALCIFICATIONS
Significance of mammographic calcifications
Most mammograms will show calcifications, which are overwhelmingly likely to be benign.
However, careful analysis of breast calcifications is essential. Abnormal calcification may be
the earliest, and possibly the only, mammographic manifestation of cancer.
When characterizing calcifications, morphology and distribution are essential.
Certain types of calcifications can be definitively characterized as benign, while some are
highly suspicious for malignancy. Other morphologies are indeterminate.
Mammographic technique
It is almost always necessary to perform spot compression magnification to characterize
calcifications as either indeterminate or suspicious for malignancy. In contrast, most types of
benign calcification can be described on routine full-field views (an exception would be milk
of calcium calcifications, which generally require a true lateral view with magnification).
Magnification employs air-gap technique and a small (0.1 mm) focal spot.
TYPICALLY BENIGN CALCIFIÇATIONS (BI-RADS 2)
Skin calcifications
Skin calcifications are associated with sweat glands, are usually punctate or lucent-centered,
and are most common medially where the concentration of sweat glands is higher.
A cluster of skin calcifications projecting over the breast may be confused for grouped
calcifications in the breast itself. If skin calcifications are suspected, a tangential view should
be performed by placing a BB directly over the calcifications in one view and then re-imaging
with the BB in tangent. Calcifications which are in the skin should be seen in the dermis on
the tangential view. Tomographic imaging can also help confirm whether or not calcifications
lie within the skin.
Vascular calcifications
Vascular and secretory calcifications:
Arterial vascular calcifications are
present in the upper portion of the
image (yellow arrow), while large
rod-like calcifications are present in
the inferior portion of the image (red
arrows).
Case courtesy Sughra Raza, MD,
Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Arterial vascular calcifications within the breast have a distinctive morphology and are
typically not mentioned in the body of the report unless they are very extensive or the
patient is very young.
Early or incomplete vascular calcifications may pose a potential problem as they may appear
similar to fine linear calcifications, which are suspicious.
Breast: 383