Fundic gland polyps (continued)
Fundic gland polyps are associated with proton pump inhibitor use, but may also occur in
polyposis syndromes such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Fundic gland polyps
have a rare malignant potential, which is more common in patients with FAP.
Adenomatous polyp
An adenomatous polyp is a neoplastic polyp with malignant potential. There is an elevated
risk of malignant transformation to adenocarcinoma with increased size, villous contour and
the presence of cellular dysplasia. There is an association with atrophic gastritis.
Adenomatous polyps are usually solitary but may be multiple.
They are usually treated with endoscopic biopsy and polypectomy.
Hamartomatous polyp
Hamartomatous polyps are benign polyps usually associated with syndromes such as Peutz-
Jeghers, juvenile polyposis, and Cronkhite-Canada syndromes.
GASTRIC ULCERS
Benign gastric ulcer
Although less commonly encountered in the modern era of proton pump inhibitors and
Helicobacter pylori treatment, benign gastric ulcers tend to have typical imaging findings:
Radiating gastric folds are smooth and symmetric.
Ulcer extends beyond the normal contour of the gastric lumen (deep).
The Hampton line represents nonulcerated acid-resistant mucosa surrounding the ulcer crater.
Most benign ulcers occur along the lesser curvature of the stomach, although benign ulcers associated
with aspirin ingestion can occur in the greater curvature and antrum, which are dependent locations.
Gastric carcinoma
Gastric carcinoma may present with malignant ulceration, which can usually be
distinguished from a benign ulcer by the following features:
Asymmetric ulcer crater, with surrounding nodular tissue.
Abrupt transition between normal gastric wall and surrounding tissue.
Ulcer crater does not project beyond the expected location of gastric wall (shallow).
The Carman meniscus sign is considered pathognomonic for tumor. It describes the splaying open of a
large, flat malignant ulcer when compression is applied.
Carmen meniscus sign (arrows) of a
malignant gastric ulcer on double-
contrast barium study.
GI: 189