Internal iliac branches
inferior mesenteric artery (IMA)
superior gluteal -
common iliac arteries
iliolumbar
lateral sacral
internal iliac artery
posterior division
anterior division
inferior/middle rectal
external iliac artery -
vesicle
uterine (in females)
obturator
inferior pudendal
inferior gluteal
The anterior division of the internal iliac artery supplies most of the pelvic viscera.
The branches of the anterior division include the inferior/middle rectal artery (anastomoses
with the IMA via the pathway of Winslow), the uterine artery, the obturator artery, and the
inferior gluteal artery.
The posterior division of the internal iliac artery supplies the musculature of the pelvic and
gluteal regions.
The branches of the posterior division include the lateral sacral artery, the iliolumbar artery
(anastomoses with external iliac via the deep circumflex iliac artery), and the superior
gluteal artery.
ABDOMINAL ANASTOMOTIC PATHWAYS
Celiac 5 SMA anastomoses
The arc of Buhler is an uncommon short-segment direct connection between the celiac
artery and the SMA. It is a persistent embryologic remnant and not an acquired collateral
pathway.
The inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery is the first SMA branch. It forms a rich collateral
network with the celiac axis about the pancreatic head, called the pancreatic cascade.
The arc of Barkow (not drawn in diagram below) connects the SMA to the celiac axis via the
right and left epiploic arteries.
SMA 1 IMA anastomoses
The marginal artery of Drummond is the major SMA t IMA anastomosis. It lies in the
peripheral mesentery of the colon, adjacent to the mesenteric surface of the colon. The
marginal artery of Drummond is comprised of branches from the ileocolic, right, middle, and
left colic arteries. Normally, the marginal artery of Drummond is small in caliber, but it may
become prominent in the setting of IMA or SMA disease.
The arc of Riolan is an inconstant SMA t IMA anastomosis. The arc of Riolan also runs
through the colonic mesentery, but more medial compared to the marginal artery of
Drummond.
The Cannon-Bôhm point is the point of transitional blood supply to the colon between the
SMA (proximal) and IMA (distal), at the splenic flexure. This watershed zone is susceptible to
ischemia in case of systemic arterial insufficiency.
Vascular: 563