Hematogenous osteomyelitis
Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis is usually seen in infants and children. The highly
vascularized metaphyses of long bones are most commonly affected. Metaphyseal venules
have sluggish flow which facilitate bacterial invasion.
In infants up to 12 months old, infections can involve the metaphysis, epiphysis, and joint
due to the presence of bridging vessels which cross the physis. In older children, infection
tends to be isolated to the metaphysis. In adults, the physes are closed but hematogenous
metaphyseal infection is uncommon.
infant
child
adult
-
Hematogenous infection is typically caused by a single organism. If blood cultures are
positive then that specific organism can be targeted and biopsy is generally not needed.
Hematogenous osteomyelitis occurs from the inside out, beginning with infection of the
medullary cavity. Secondary involvement of the cortex occurs as bacteria spread through
Haversian and Volkmann canals into the periosteum and subsequently the soft tissues. In
infants and children, the periosteum is loosely adherent to the bone, causing prominent
lifting of the periosteum by infection. This manifests radiographically as exuberant
periostitis. In contrast, in adults the periosteum is more tightly adherent to bone and
periostitis is less prominent.
hematogenous
osteomyelitis
initial infection is
infection spreads through
intra-medullary
the cortex and uplifts the periosteum
In adults, hematogenous osteomyelitis most commonly affects the spine.
Chronic osteomyelitis may produce infected nonviable tissue (sequestrum). An involucrum is
living bone which surrounds the sequestrum. The involucrum may be perforated by cloacae,
which can open to the skin to form a sinus tract. Chronic drainage of sinus tract predisposes
to squamous cell carcinoma.
Initial subtle radiographic changes in hematogenous osteomyelitis include focal soft-tissue
swelling, regional osteopenia, and obliteration of the soft-tissue fat planes.
The radiographic appearance of medullary infection is a focal, ill-defined lucent metaphyseal
lesion. The lucency may cross the epiphysis in young children, where epiphyseal bridging
vessels may be still patent. Periosteal reaction may appear aggressive and lamellated,
mimicking Ewing sarcoma.
MSK: 975