Chiari II
Chiari II is a completely different entity from Chiari
1; however, a common feature among all Chiari
malformations is inferior displacement of the hindbrain.
Chiari II malformation is part of a complex malformation
involving the hindbrain, spine, and mesoderm of the skull
base and spinal column.
It results from a lowered craniospinal pressure
difference, resulting from egress of CSF through an open
spinal defect.
The primary abnormality in Chiari II is herniation of
the cerebellar vermis, cerebellar tonsils, and medulla
through the foramen magnum, with resultant beaking of
the tectum.
A myelomeningocele is universally present, typically
lumbar.
The fourth ventricle is low in position, elongated and
inferiorly displaced. In some cases, the fourth ventricle
can herniate posteriorly and inferiorly, behind the
medulla and below the vermis, resulting in an encysted Parasagittal T2-weighted fetal MRI
fourth ventricle.
shows a lumbar myelomeningocele
(arrow) and marked hydrocephalus.
Approximately 80-90% of children with Chiari II have
hydrocephalus necessitating shunt placement, due to
fourth ventricular obstruction.
Associated supratentorial anomalies include corpus
callosal dysgenesis, heterotopias, and sulcation
abnormalities.
Dandy-Walker complex
The classic Dandy-Walker malformation is
identified by hypoplasia or absence of the
cerebellar vermis, hypoplastic cerebellar
hemispheres, and a large fluid-filled fourth
ventricle within an enlarged posterior fossa
with high tentorium and elevated torcula
Heterophili.
An in-utero insult to the developing fourth
ventricle is thought to result in fourth
ventricular outflow obstruction, cyst-like
dilation of the fourth ventricle (which
communicates with a retrocerebellar cyst),
and resultant inferior vermain hypoplasia.
Most patients have hydrocephalus.
Upwards displacement of the tentorium by
the enlarged fourth ventricle and posterior
T2-weighted axial MRI shows an enlarged
fossa cyst causes torcular-lambdoid inversion. fourth ventricle communicating with a large
The torcular herophili is the confluence of the retrocerebellar cyst, which displaces the tentorium
upwards. There is hydrocephalus, with dilation of
transverse and the straight sinuses, which is
the temporal horns and third ventricle.
pushed superiorly, above the lambdoid suture.
Peds: 1190