Esophageal foreign body
A radiopaque esophageal foreign body is best visualized with a lateral radiograph or CT.
Bony foreign objects usually get stuck in the cervical esophagus.
Meat impaction usually occurs at the gastroesophagea. junction. There is a risk of
esophageal perforation from transmural ischemia if the food bolus is impacted for >24
hours. Most cases of food bolus impaction are treated with endoscopic removal of the
impacted food.
MALIGNANT ESOPHAGEAL MASSES
Esophageal carcinoma
Esophageal carcinoma: Oblique fluoroscopic spot image from al barium swallow (left image) shows an irregular
stricture (yellow arrows) with proximal dilation of the esophagus. Two linear ulcerations (red arrows) project
into the mural mass.
Contrast-enhanced axial CT (right image) shows irregular thickening of the esophagus (arrows).
Case courtesy of Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital
Esophageal carcinoma has a broad range of appearances. Early esophageal cancer may be
apparent on barium swallow as a plaque-like lesion, polypoid lesion, or focal irregularity
of the esophageal wall. A classic appearance of advanced esophageal carcinoma is a mass
causing a stricture with a "shouldered" edge and irregular contour (apple-core appearance).
The uncommon varicoid appearance can be confused with varices, but the tumor does not change shape
with peristaltic waves as varices typically do.
Esophageal carcinoma may be squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) or adenocarcinoma. These
cannot be reliably differentiated by imaging, although SCC tends to involve the upper or
mid-esophagus and adenocarcinoma typically involves the distal esophagus and may extend
into the stomach.
SCC is most commonly due to smoking and alcohol. Less common risk factors include celiac
disease, Plummer-Vinson syndrome, achalasia, and human papilloma virus (more commonly
causes laryngeal SCC).
Adenocarcinoma usually arises from Barrett's esophagus and is due to chronic reflux. The
incidence has been rising in recent years.
GI: 179