Pseudoprogression
A treatment-related phenomenon that mimics tumor progression after targeted radiation
and chemotherapy is termed pseudoprogression.
In patients who are receiving standard concomitant radiation with temozolomide followed
by adjuvant temozolomide, pseudoprogression peaks after 3-6 months of therapy and rarely
occurs after 6 months.
Pseudoprogression presents as transient contrast enhancement and edema on imaging
which subsequently resolves on follow-up scans without treatment. Appropriate
recognition of pseudoprogression is important to prevent early discontinuation of adjuvant
chemotherapy.
The incidence of pseudoprogression is an active area of research, however some reports
suggest that pseudoprogression may occur more frequently in patients who harbor a MGMT
promoter methylation status.
Currently, no imaging techniques can reliably differentiate between pseudoprogression
and early progressive disease. Techniques that have been investigated include diffusion-
weighted MRI (lower mean ADC values and ADC ratios associated with progressive disease)
and MR perfusion (higher relative cerebral blood volume associated with progressive
disease) are limited due to confounding by necrosis and vascular leakage which may
underestimate rCBV. FDG-PET is widely available however has an unacceptably low
sensitivity and specificity. Novel tracers such as FET-PET, FDOPA-PET, 13N-NH3 PET are under
investigation.
Stereotactic radiosurgery
Stereotactic radiation therapy is the delivery of highly focused radiation to a target, and
when completed in a single fraction is called radiosurgery.
Transient increase in size of the lesion can occur 3-12 months after radiosurgery, and usually
subsides without treatment.
Radiation necrosis occurs later after completion of treatment, typically 9-12 months after
therapy, rarely occurs before 6 months and does not subside without treatment.
Perfusion MRI has been proven to be useful in distinguishing recurrent metastasis
from radiation necrosis. The percentage of signal recovery computed from comparing
enhancement at one hour from peak enhancement of a region of interest has been shown
to have a sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 100% for radiation necrosis. However, this
technique requires perfusion imaging times of up to an hour which can be logistically
difficult.
Chemotherapy-related white matter disease
Chemotherapy may cause focal, multifocal, or diffuse white matter disease, especially in
combination with radiation treatment.
Methotrexate toxicity is discussed in the toxic/metabolic section later in the chapter.
Neuro Brain: 737