Achalasia (continued)
Chagas disease causes a secondary achalasia that is indistinguishable radiographically from
primary achalasia.
Complications of chronic achalasia include esophageal cancer, which has a lag period of at
least 20 years, and candidal infection from stasis.
The classic imaging appearance of achalasia is a massively dilated esophagus with a bird's
beak stricture near the gastroesophageal junction.
Treatment options include physical disruption of the lower esophageal sphincter by
pneumatic dilatation, surgical myotomy (Heller myotomy), or peroral endoscopic myotomy
(POEM), and pharmacologic interventions such as botulinum toxin injection.
Pseudoachalasia is caused by an obstructing gastroesophageal junction cancer mimicking
primary achalasia. These can be differentiated on fluoroscopy because in achalasia there
is eventual transient relaxation of the narrowing when the patient stands but the fixed
obstruction of pseudoachalasia will not relax with standing.
Scleroderma
Scleroderma is a systemic disease involving excess collagen deposition in multiple tissues.
The esophagus is involved in 80% of patients with scleroderma, producing lack of peristalsis
of the distal 2/3 of the esophagus due to smooth muscle atrophy and fibrosis, which leads
to marked esophageal dilation.
Secondary candidiasis or aspiration pneumonia can result from prolonged esophageal stasis.
The esophageal dilation is often apparent before the typical skin changes of scleroderma
become evident.
Diffuse esophageal spasm
Diffuse esophageal spasm is
a clinical syndrome of chest
Single-contrast esophagram
pain or dysphagia caused by
demonstrates delayed
repetitive, non-propulsive
passage of barium through
esophageal contractions.
the esophagus, with multiple
tertiary contractions in a
The non-propulsive
corkscrew configuration, and
contractions have a
subsequent esophageal reflux
characteristic appearance
(not shown).
on barium swallow leading
to the descriptive name of
corkscrew esophagus.
GI: 181