Hepatic iron overload
Regardless of the etiology, the iron-overloaded liver is hypointense on all MRI sequences
relative to the paraspinal muscles as an internal control, and there is signal dropout on in-
phase images.
There are two pathways to excess hepatic iron accumulation, as described below.
Primary hemochromatosis is the most common cause of iron overload, due to a genetic
defect causing increased iron absorption through the GI tract.
Excess iron is deposited in hepatocytes (not the Kupffer cells that make up the intrahepatic
reticuloendothelial system or RES), pancreas, myocardium, skin, and joints. Excess ironi in hepatocytes can
cause cirrhosis.
Liver and pancreas are markedly T2 hypointense and show signal dropout on in-phase images. The spleen
and bone marrow are normal since the RES is not involved.
Treatment of primary hemochromatosis is phlebotomy.
Primary hemochromatosis: Axial T2-weighted MRI
demonstrates diffuse low T2 signal in the liver and
pancreas with associated signal loss on in-phase
imaging (not shown).
Secondary hemochromatosis is usually seen in diseases that cause hemosiderosis, where
excess iron accumulates within the RES. This may be due to frequent blood transfusions or
defective erythrocytosis. Treatment of hemosiderosis is with iron chelators, not phlebotomy.
The RES has a large capacity for iron. Therefore, iron stored in the RES is generally not harmful and the
liver is normal in morphology without cirrhosis. However, when the RES becomes overwhelmed with iron,
the hepatocytes begin to store the excess.. Just as in primary hemochromatosis, hepatocyte iron uptake
may lead to cirrhosis.
MRI imaging of hemosiderosis demonstrates hypointense liver on conventional MRI sequences and signal
drop on in-phase images, as in hemochromatosis. Additionally, the spleen and bone marrow will also
appear hypointense due to increased iron stores throughout the entire reticuloendothelial system. The
pancreas is spared.
Primary = Pancreas
Secondary = Spleen
In-phase MRI
Out-of-phase MRI
T2-weighted MRI
Secondary hemochromatosis: Multisequence MRI shows diffuse low T2 signal in the liver and spleen with
associated signal loss on in-phase imaging compared to out-of-phase imaging, consistent with iron deposition
from hemosiderosis in this patient with transftuson-dependent anemia.
GI: 101