ACUTE REACTION TO CONTRAST MEDIA
Contrast media reaction overview
Acute reactions to iodinated and gadolinium-based intravenous contrast can be divided into
allergic-type and non allergic-type mechanisms. Both allergic-type and non allergic-type
reactions can range in severity from mild and self-limited to severe and life-threatening.
Many of the side effects of contrast agents are due to the hyperosmolarity of the solution.
Patients with asthma are at increased risk of an allergic-like contrast reaction.
Seafood or shellfish or povidone-iodine allergies do not increase the risk of allergic reaction
to iodinated contrast more SO than any other allergy.
Mild nausea, sensation of warmth, and flushing are considered physiologic and are not
adverse reactions to contrast.
Mild contrast reactions
A mild contrast reaction is self-limited and does not require medical management.
A vasovagal reaction to intravenous contrast is rare and is characterized by bradycardia and
hypotension. Mild vasovagal reactions are usually self-limited and are not allergic in etiology.
Urticarial reactions are mild allergic-type reactions, and include hives and mild angioedema.
The symptoms of mild angioedema include scratchy throat, slight tongue or facial swelling,
sneezing, and generally do not require medical management.
Moderate contrast reactions
Moderate contrast reactions are not immediately life-threatening but may require medical
management.
Moderate allergic-type reactions include severe urticaria, bronchospasm, moderate tongue/
facial swelling, and transient hypotension with tachycardia.
Moderate non allergic-type reactions include significant vasovagal reaction, protracted
nausea/vomiting, isolated chest pain, and hypertensive urgency.
Severe contrast reactions
Severe reactions to intravenous iodinated contrast may be immediately life-threatening.
Allergic-type severe reactions include anaphylaxis and angioedema. Symptoms may be
varied and include altered mental status, respiratory distress, diffuse erythema, severe
hypotension, or cardiac arrest.
Non allergic-type severe reactions include pulmonary edema, severe bronchospasm,
hypertensive emergency, and seizure.
Premedication to prevent contrast reaction
In a patient with a known contrast allergy, a repeat contrast reaction is most likely to be
similar to the prior reaction. However, the repeat reaction may be either more or less
severe. Therefore, if IV contrast is necessary for a patient who has had a previous reaction,
a premedication regimen is recommended, although contrast reactions may occur despite
premedication. Intravenous contrast is generally contraindicated in patients who have had a
prior severe allergic-type reaction.
Elective premedication: Prednisone 50 mg PO at 13 hours, 7 hours, and 1 hour before the
exam, plus diphenhydramine 50 mg (IV or PO) 1 hour before.
Emergent premedication: Hydrocortisone 200 mg IV at 5 hours and 1 hour before contrast
administration. Diphenhydramine is given 1 hour prior. Note that IV steroids have not been
shown to be effective when given sooner than 4 hours before the contrast administration.
Physics: 1196