Gamna-Gandy bodies (continued)
Axial in- and out-of-phase gradient echo MRI shows numerous low signal foci in the spleen which demonstrate
blooming on in-phase imaging (right image) compared to out-of-phase imaging (left image), representing
Gamna-Gandy bodies. Note cirrhotic morphology of the liver (nodular contour, widened fissures, multiple
regenerative nodules).
Gaucher disease
Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive deficiency of glucocerebrosidase, leading to
accumulation of glucocerebrosides in the reticuloendothelal system.
Splenic manifestations of Gaucher disease include splenomegaly (almost always) and
multiple splenic nodules (seen in one-third of Gaucher patients).
Associated bony findings seen in Gaucher disease include the characteristic Erlenmeyer flask
deformity of the distal femurs, femoral head avascular necrosis, and H-shaped vertebral
bodies from endplate avascular necrosis.
SPLENIC TRAUMA
Overview of splenic trauma
The spleen is the most commonly injured abdominal organ in blunt trauma.
Splenectomy dramatically increases the risk of subsequent sepsis, which has driven the
trend towards splenic preservation and conservative management of splenic trauma.
The spleen must be evaluated for injury in the portal venous phase, as physiologic
heterogeneous enhancement in the arterial phase can both mask and mimic injury.
A splenic hematoma is a focal collection of blood (hypoattenuating relative to enhanced
spleen and hyperattenuating relative to unenhanced spleen), usually subcapsular in location.
Less commonly, a hematoma may be intraparenchymal, where it is irregular in shape.
A: splenic laceration can only be well seen on a contrast-enhanced study, where it appears as
a linear or branching area of decreased attenuation.
Active contrast extravasation due to vessel injury appears as an area of increased
attenuation (initially iso-enhancing to the arterial blood pool), which continues to increase
in size or attenuation on delayed scanning due to pooling of extravasated blood.
In contrast to active extravasation, pseudoaneurysm and arteriovenous (AV) fistula are
contained vascular injuries that also initially appear as a focal area of increased attenuation,
but do not increase in size on delayed scanning.
A pseudoaneurysm is caused by injury to the intima and media of the arterial wall and is essentially a
rupture contained only by the adventitia. There is al high chance of rupture without treatment.
A traumatic AV fistula is indistinguishable from pseudoaneurysm by CT and is due to injury of an artery
and the adjacent vein. Splenic arteriography is the only way to differentiate pseudoaneurysm from
arteriovenous fistula.
GI: 170