Type II incomplete partition (Mondini deformity)
Axial noncontrast CT through the left temporal
bone shows cochlear hypoplasia with 1.5 turns
and a cystic apex representing fusion of the
middle and apical turns (yellow arrow). The
modiolus is deficient and the lateral interscalar
septum is absent. An ipsilaterally enlarged
vestibular aqueduct is also present (red arrow).
The most common form of congenital cochlear dysplasia, accounting for more than 50% of
all cochlear deformities. It consists of a cochlea with 1.5 turns and absence of the interscalar
septum and osseous spiral lamina. The basal turn appears normal and the middle and apical
turns coalesce to form a cystic apex.
Although the correct nomenclature for this anomaly is incomplete partition type II, it is
commonly and historically referred to as the Mondini deformity. The use of the eponym
Mondini to describe cochlear dysplasia is controversial and probably best avoided, as there
is confusion amongst radiologists regarding the exact malformation originally described.
There is strong association with an enlarged vestibule and enlarged vestibular aqueduct and
normal semicircular canals.
Type I incomplete partition (cystic cochleovestibular malformation)
Type l incomplete partition accounts for about 6% of all cochlear malformations. It is
characterized by a complete absence of the modiolus, a cystic appearance of the cochlea,
and a dilated appearance of the vestibule, forming a figure 8. The cochlea and vestibule are
distinct, distinguishing from a common cavity.
Common cavity
A common cavity accounts for about 25% of all cochlear malformations. It is defined by the
absence of the normal differentiation between the cochlea and vestibule.
Cochlear hypoplasia
Cochlear hypoplasia accounts for about 15% of all cochlear malformations. This results in
aberration in the development of the cochlear duct during the sixth week of gestation. It
is defined by the presence of a small cochlear bud arising from an abnormally small and
deformed vestibule, usually with only one or a partial turn. Frequently it is accompanied by
an abnormally small IAC.
Cochlear aplasia
Cochlear aplasia is rare and accounts for about 3% of all cochlear malformations. It is
characterized by an absent cochlea with a normal or deformed vestibule and semicircular
canals.
Neuro Head & Neck: 822