CORONARY CT ANGIOGRAPHY
Evidence for using coronary CT to evaluate for ischemic cardiac disease
Coronary CT angiography (CCTA) is an excellent test to rule out hemodynamically significant
coronary artery disease (CAD). Meta-analyses of multiple trials have shown the negative
predictive value for CCTA to be approaching 100%.
In the emergency room setting, CCTA is an appropriate first-line test for evaluation of acute
chest pain in low to intermediate risk patients without known CAD, who presented with
normal cardiac enzymes and non-ischemic ECG.
For patients with high pretest probability of acute coronary syndrome, the appropriate
diagnostic approach is functional assessment such as stress testing or invasive coronary
angiography.
For patients with equivocal stress tests, a negative CCTA may suggest against admission or
further invasive testing.
CCTA is very sensitive for hemodynamically significant (>50% lumenal diameter) stenoses;
however, a stenosis found on CT may be overcalled, especially if there is calcified plaque,
which can cause a blooming artifact.
Other indications of CCTA include coronary assessment prior to cardiac or other major
surgery, evaluation of suspected coronary anomalies, cardiac valves, and coronary artery
bypass grafts.
ECG gating and radiation dose
ECG gating is used to minimize cardiac motion. The choice of ECG gating has a large effect on
patient radiation dose.
To estimate the radiation dose, the dose-length product (DLP) should be multiplied by a conversion factor
of 0.017 to arrive at the dose in millisieverts.
In a retrospectively gated exam, continuous CT scanning is performed throughout the
cardiac cycle and the images are correlated to the ECG cycle afterwards.
The main advantage of retrospective gating is the ability to create cine reconstructions to evaluate cardiac
and valvular function, typically with 10-20 frames per cardiac cycle.
The main disadvantage of retrospective gating is a significant increase in radiation exposure compared to a
prospectively gated study.
For prospective gating, the ECG is used to time image acquisition at a specific phase of the
cardiac cycle, exposing the patient to radiation only during this segment of the cardiac cycle.
The main advantage of prospective gating is decreased radiation exposure.
However, since only a fraction of the cardiac cycle is acquired, cine reconstructions are not possible.
Retrospective ECG gating
Prospective ECG gating
= x-ray beam on
NN
Cardiac: 505