Is there attenuation artifact from the breast, diaphragm, or chest wall? Attenuation artifacts have normal
wall motion on gated SPECT cine. A true fixed defect (infarct or scar) is hypokinetic or akinetic.
Is there abnormal extracardiac uptake? Focal intense uptake in the breast or lung may signify cancer.
Is there pulmonary uptake on exercise thallium-201 or Tc-99m sestamibi/tetrofosmin scan? Abnormally
increased lung-to-heart activity ratio indicates stress-induced left ventricular dysfunction, usually from left
main or multivessel coronary artery disease.
2: Mean 164.48: 17.07 CNTS (25,126,191
of
=263.28: 59.48 CNTS (25. 158,346 Pulmonary uptake Tc-99m
sestamibi:
Planar rotating projection images
demonstrate increased lung uptake on
exercise Tc-99m sestamibi scan with a
lung to heart ratio of 0.62.
SPECT rest and exercise perfusion
images demonstrated multivessel
ischemia (not shown).
Evaluation of the rest and stress SPECT or PET perfusion images is the core of the exam, with
the key question: Is there a perfusion defect on the stress images? If a perfusion abnormality
is present, the following additional questions help to characterize it:
Is the defect reversible on rest images? A reversible defect signifies ischemia, while a fixed defect may
represent either infarct/scar or hibernating myocardium.
How large is the defect (number of myocardial segments, described on the next page)? Small (1-2
segments); medium (3-4 segments); large (5 or more segments).
How severe is it? Mild subendocardial), moderate, or severe (transmural)?
Where is it? In which coronary artery territory?
Is there dilation of the left ventricle during stress (transient ischemic dilation, TID)? If SO, implies left main
or three vessel disease and worse prognosis, even when there is no focal defect.
Is there right ventricular uptake? If so, implies right heart disease or pulmonary hypertension.
Is there exercise-induced reversible: septal defect, not following a coronary artery territory? This occurs
with LBBB in the absence of coronary artery disease and is not seen with pharmacologic stress.
In summary, an example interpretation may be: There is a medium-sized, perfusion defect of severe
intensity involving the mid and basal inferior walls and the basal inferoseptal wall that was fixed. These
findings suggest myocardial scar in the typical distribution of the RCA.
Gated SPECT (GSPECT) uses ECG gating of a standard myocardial perfusion SPECT acquisition
for the quantitative assessment of the LV function. GSPECT allows for evaluation of LV
perfusion at the same time as left ventricular wall motion, wall thickening, and ejection
fraction (LVEF). It is not used to evaluate right ventricular function.
Cardiac: 492