Myxopapillary ependymoma (continued)
Myxopapillary ependymomas are the most common tumor of the cauda equina region,
arising from ependymal glia within the conus medullaris and filum terminale. They are a
benign (WHO grade I) variant of ependymoma.
The tumor is characterized by slow growth, classically presenting when larger and
sausage-shaped, causing vertebral scalloping and spinal canal enlargement. It frequently
hemorrhages, resulting in peripheral hemosiderin deposits as hypointensity on T2-weighted
images and blooming on GRE.
Paraganglioma
Spinal paragangliomas are rare and arise almost exclusively in the filum terminale and cauda
equina region.
Similar to paragangliomas elsewhere, spinal paragangliomas show well-circumscribed
margins, hyperintensity on T2-weighted images, avid contrast enhancement, and vascular
flow voids.
INTRADURAL EXTRAMEDULLARY SPINAL CONGENITAL/DEVELOPMENTAL LESIONS
Overview of spinal dysraphisms
Spinal dysraphisms are a spectrum of congenital midline fusion abnormalities involving
neuroectodermal, ectodermal, and/or mesodermal tissues related to the spine and spinal
cord.
Spinal dysraphisms are classified as open (not covered by intact skin) or closed (covered by
skin). Closed spinal dysraphisms are more common.
Older terms include spina bifida occulta (for closed spinal dysraphism) and spina bifida
aperta/cystica (for open spinal dysraphism). Spina bifida, strictly speaking, refers to unfused
posterior vertebral elements but is usually used to refer to spinal dysraphism in general.
The most common open spinal dysraphism is myelomeningocele.
The spectrum of closed spinal dysraphism includes split cord malformations, caudal
regression syndrome, persistent ventriculus terminalis, dorsal dermal sinus, neurenteric
cyst, spinal lipoma variants including pomyelomeningocele. meningocele (herniation of
CSF-filled dural sac), and myelocystocele (herniation of syrinx outside spinal canal).
Myelomeningocele
Myelomeningocele is a neural tube defect in which neural placode (embryonic neural tissue)
and meninges protrude through defective vertebral posterior elements and are exposed
above the skin surface.
The lumbosacral region is most commonly involved. Patients have neurologic deficits
involving the bowel, bladder, and lower extremities.
Myelomeningocele is nearly always associated with Chiari II malformation. Hydrocephalus is
present in most cases.
The defect must be surgically repaired soon after birth. A common complication in children
with previously repaired myelomeningocele is tethered cord syndrome.
Split cord malformation
Split cord malformations are forms of spinal dysraphism in which a segment of the spinal
cord is divided/duplicate.d. They are classified into those contained within double dural sacs
separated by a rigid 0sseocartlaginous, septum (type I) and those contained within a single
dural sac separated by a nonrigid (fibrous) septum (type II).
Spine: 873