ABDOMINAL AORTA
ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSM
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
Abdominal aortic aneurysm:
Axial CT of the infrarenal
aorta demonstrates a
large peripherally calcified
abdominal aortic aneurysm
(arrows) containing extensive
mural thrombus.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley,
MD, University of Virginia
Health System.
An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is defined as an aortic diameter >3 cm.
AAA is relatively prevalent in older men (seen in up to 5.9% of men by age 80) and less
common in women. Rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm is the thirteenth leading cause
of death in older men. Risk factors for development of an AAA include age, male sex,
smoking, and family history.
Similar to measurement of thoracic aortic aneurysms, CT evaluation should include double
oblique reformatted images to obtain a true cross-sectional diameter.
Ultrasound is a principal screening modality for AAA, with a proven mortality benefit
in 65-79-year-old men who have ever smoked tobacco. If an aneurysm is present, the
diameter is measured in three orthogonal planes.
Ultrasound screening of high-risk patients is approved by Medicare for patients older than
age 65. If an aneurysm is detected on screening, follow-up is recommended:
Aneurysm <4 cm: Follow-up in 6 months; if no change - annual surveillance.
Aneurysm 4-4.5 cm: Follow-up in 6 months; if no change - 6-month surveillance.
Aneurysm 5-5.5 cm: Consider surgery.
Aneurysm >5.5 cm: Surgery recommended.
Aortic rupture
Rupture is a complication of aortic aneurysms and is the most important diagnosis that
should be excluded in patients with acute chest or abdominal pain, hypotension, and
pulsatile abdominal mass.
80% of aortic aneurysm rupture occurs in the retroperitoneum, 20% occurs towards the
peritoneum, and rarely to the IVC (aorto-caval fistula) or to the bowel (aorto-enteric fistula).
Risk factors for impending rupture include increased aneurysm size (especially >7 cm),
decreased thrombus-to-lumen ratio, and infected aneurysms.
Classic imaging features of AAA rupture include:
Retroperitoneal hematoma.
Periaortic stranding.
Contrast extravasation.
Vascular: 555