Thornwaldt cyst
A Thornwaldt cyst is a notochordal remnant that is usually asymptomatic, but may be a
cause of halitosis. The typical location of a Thornwaldt cyst is in the midline nasopharynx.
Axial T1-weighted (left image) and T2-weighted (right image) MRI show a wel-circumscribed, T1 hyperintense
T2 hypointense lesion in the midline nasopharynx, consistent with a Thornwaldt cyst containing proteinaceous
material.
OROPHARYNX
Overview and anatomy
The oropharynx includes the posterior and superior pharyngeal walls from the level of
the soft palate to the hyoid bone, and includes the posterior 1/3 of the tongue (i.e., base
of tongue), the vallecula, the palatine tonsils. The tongue base is the site of the lingual
tonsillar tissue. The circumvallate papillae defines the anterior border of the oropharynx and
separates the oropharynx from the oral cavity.
The soft palate is part of the oropharynx and the hard palate is part of the oral cavity.
Oropharyngeal SCC
The most common locations for oropharyngeal SCC are the anterior portion of the tonsil and
the tongue base.
In contrast to nasopharyngeal SCC, there are two TNM staging classifications for
oropharyngeal SCC, depending on the p16 or high-risk HPV status. 16+/HPV-associated
oropharyngeal SCC has a much better prognosis despite the tendency to have early nodal
metastases and the staging scheme accounts for this. Additionally, unlike nasopharyngeal
SCC, the T-staging of the oropharynx is largely based on size criteria (T1-T3).
Evaluation of the pre-epiglottic fat space is important as involvement of this area results
in upstaging to T3. Other areas that must be specifically addressed during staging include
mandibular invasion, prevertebral muscle invasion which precludes surgical resection,
pterygopalatine fossa invasion which raises the possibility of perineural spread, bilateral
involvement of the base of tongue which has implications for surgical resection, and
ymphadenopathy.
Treatment is dependent on the stage, with single-modality treatment with surgery or
radiation in early-stage cancers and combined treatment in higher-stage disease.
Neuro Head & Neck: 835