Placenta accreta spectrum
Placenta accreta spectrum is abnormally tenacious or deep attachment of the placenta into
the myometrium, carrying a risk of hemorrhage at the time of placental separation.
Accreta is thought to be caused by uterine scarring (which may be secondary to prior
Caesarean section, dilation and curettage, endometritis, or adenomyosis) and resultant
endometrial deficiency. It is especially important to consider accreta if an anterior placenta
is present with a history of prior Caesarean section. Other predisposing conditions include
placenta previa, advanced maternal age, and multiparity.
Ultrasound findings of accreta include prominent irregular vascular lacunar spaces within
the placenta and thinning or absence of the myometrium underlying the placenta. The
presence of a moth-eaten placenta with vascular lacunar spaces near the bladder is highly
specific for accreta.
Placenta accreta is an umbrella term that describes three degrees of placental attachment/
invasion. Confusingly, the term "placenta accreta" also describes one of the specific three
degrees.
In placenta accreta, the placenta attaches deeply into the myometrium. Ultrasound shows
thinning or absence of the normal hypoechoic subplacental myometrium.
In placenta increta, the placenta invades into the myometrium to the serosa.
In placenta percreta, placenta penetrates through the serosa to invade other structures. A
focal bulge in the uterine wall is seen.
Placenta percreta: Sagittal ultrasound of the uterus shows cystic spaces (yellow arrows) within the inferior
placenta abutting the bladder, consistent with vascular lacunae. There is thinning of the myometrium at
the placental/bladder interface (red arrows).
Placental chorioangioma
Chorioangioma is the most common benign tumor of the placenta.
Iti is associated with hydrops, congenital abnormalities, hemolytic anemia, polyhydramnios,
intrauterine growth restriction, and intrauterine fetal death.
On ultrasound, chorioangioma appears as a hypoechoic, rounded mass in the placenta with
anechoic cystic areas and low resistance flow representing enlarged vascular channels.
Obstetrics: 346