Superscan (continued)
A: superscan is most commonly due to metastatic prostate cancer. Other malignancies
producing a superscan include breast cancer and lymphoma.
A superscan can also be caused by metabolic bone disease in yperparatlyroidism and renal
osteodystrophy. If the cause for the superscan is metabolic, then the entire long bones tend
to demonstrate diffusely increased uptake. In contrast, with metastatic disease the axial
skeleton and proximal humeri and femora are primarily affected.
Primary bone tumors
Osteosarcoma typically causes markedly increased uptake, often with increased uptake in
the entire affected limb.
Ewing sarcoma features intense and homogeneous activity. It may be positive on all three
phases of a three-phase bone scan, mimicking osteomyelitis.
Benign bone tumors that have intense uptake include osteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma,
fibrous dysplasia, giant cell tumor, and aneurysmal bone cyst.
Osteoid osteoma features a vascular central nidus which demonstrates intense activity.
The double density sign describes an intense focus of uptake corresponding to the nidus,
surrounded by relatively increased uptake representing hyperemia. The differential of the
double density sign includes osteoid osteoma, Brodie abscess, less likely stress fracture.
Double density sign of osteoid osteoma: Tc-99m MDP bone scan Coronal CT of the left hip shows a well
(25.9 mCi administered) shows asymmetric regional uptake in the circumscribed lucent lesion (arrow)
left femoral head (red arrows), with a focus of intense uptake at with a sclerotic rim and lucent nidus,
the left lateral head/neck junction (yellow arrow).
with mild surrounding osteopenia,
consistent with osteoid osteoma.
Case courtesy Roger Han, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Fracture
An acute fracture (from the initial injury up to 3-4 weeks) will show increased radiotracer
uptake surrounding the fracture site. 95% of fractures are positive after one day in patients
under 65 years old. Note that skull fractures rarely show activity.
In the subacute phase (until two to three months) radiotracer activity becomes more focal
at the fracture.
In the healing phase (variable time course, with 40% remaining abnormal after one year)
there is a gradual decrease in radiotracer activity.
Toddler's fracture represents a spiral fracture of the tibia and occurs in recently ambulatory
children. Skeletal scintigraphy is sensitive and specific, and routinely used in workup of a
limping child if the radiographs are negative.
Nucs: 473