Vasa previa
Vasa previa is the traversing of fetal placental vessels across the internal cervical OS, which
can be caused by velamentous insertion or a placental succenturiate lobe (discussed below).
Vesa previa: Grayscale ultrasound (left image) in region of the fetal head and cervix demonstrates the
position of the endocervical canal (yellow arrows). Although the grayscale image appeared normal, color
Doppler shows a placental vessel (red arrow) traversing the internal cervical OS. Spectral Doppler (not shown)
confirmed presence of a fetal arterial vessel.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD, Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
AMNIOTIC FLUID
Overview of fetal amniotic fluid
Amniotic fluid surrounds the fetus and is required for normal development of multiple organ
systems, including the lungs.
It is produced primarily by the fetal genitourinary tract and is excreted by the fetus as urine.
A small amount is also produced by the fetal lungs and nasopharyngeal cavities.
Amniotic fluid is absorbed primarily by fetal swallowing and passage of fluid through the GI
tract.
Assessment of amniotic fluid volume is discussed earlier in the chapter.
Oligohydramnios
Oligohydramnios is too little amniotic fluid.
Most commonly, oligohydramnios is associated with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR)
without a fetal structural anomaly.
When severe, oligohydramnios results in pulmonary hypoplasia. It may also lead to
Potter sequence, a constellation of findings including facial dysmorphism, club feet, and
musculoskeletal contractures due to diminished intrauterine space.
Although malformations are relatively uncommon, the genitourinary system must be
carefully evaluated in the setting of oligohydramnios. Genitourinary anomalies that may lead
to oligohydramnios include:
Renal agenesis -1 fatal if bilateral.
Congenital bladder outlet obstruction, including posterior urethral valves.
Bilateral ureteropelvic junction obstructions.
Renal dysplasias, including autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD).
Obstetrics: 343