Benign nerve sheath tumor schwannoma, neurofibroma)
Spinal nerve sheath tumors are mostly benign (WHO grade I) intradural extramedullary
tumors which arise from nerve roots, including schwannoma (more common) and
neurofibroma. 15% are both intradural and extradural; 15% are completely extradural.
Intramedullary cases are rare.
While most cases are isolated, multiple lesions in younger patients are seen in
neurofibromatosis type 1 (neurofibroma) and type 2 schwannoma). Schwannomatosis is
another genetic disorder with multiple schwannomas.
Spinal schwannomas most commonly involve the lumbar region and are the second most
common tumor in the cauda equina region. Spinal neurofibromas most commonly involve
the cervical region.
Tumors with intraspinal, foraminal, and extraforaminal components are called "dumbbell"
tumors, due to the restrained growth at the neural foramen, which may be enlarged by
pressure erosion. Dumbbell tumors are most commonly nerve sheath tumors and may be
both intradural and extradural or completely extradural.
Schwannoma and neurofibroma have similar imaging appearances, presenting on MRI
as a T2-hyperintense enhancing intradural mass. Some show the target sign (central
hypointensity on T2-weighted images surrounded by a hyperintense periphery). Larger
schwannomas may show cystic change.
Schwannomas are encapsulated and separable from the parent nerve, SO nerve-sparing
resection is possible. Neurofibromas are unencapsulated and infiltrate between nerve
fascicles, SO complete resection necessitates nerve sacrifice.
Myxopapillary ependymoma
Myxopapillary ependymoma: Sagittal T2 (left image), T1 (middle image), and post-contrast T1-weighted (right
image) MRI demonstrate al heterogeneously T2 hyperintense, lobulated mass (red arrows) containing regions
of hypointensity on the T2-weighted image. The mass is located at the conus medullaris and avidly enhances.
There is also enhancing leptomeningeal dissemination along the surface of the more proximal cord (yellow
arrows) and along the cauda equina nerve roots (blue arrow).
Case courtesy Gregory Wrubel, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Spine: 872