hepatic veins
merge into IVC
Aorta
RHA = right hepatic artery
LPV
LHA = left hepatic artery
CHA = common hepatic artery
LHA
RPV: = right portal vein- RHA
LPV = left portal vein
MPV=I mainy portal vein
RPV
MPV
CHA
splenic artery
CBD
splenic vein
pancreas
portal triad
superior
inferior
mesenteric
mesenteric
vein
vein
Each hepatic segment features its own:
Central portal triad made up of a portal vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct, with peripheral venous
drainage to the hepatic veins and ultimately the IVC.
Mnemonic for remembering the segments:
Superior segments, from left to right: 2, 4, 8, 7,1 (caudate). 2 doubled is 4; 4 doubled is 8; 8 minus 1 is 7.
Inferior segments, from left to right: 3, 4, 5, 6.
Segments 2, 3, and 4 are in the left lobe of the liver.
Segments 5, 6, 7, 8 are in the right lobe of the liver.
The left and right main portal veins divide the superior from the inferior segments and
continue to branch superiorly and inferiorly before terminating in the center of each
segment.
The branching of the portal veins is variable. The most common pattern is a bifurcation into
right and left main portal veins, with the right main portal vein then branching into anterior
and posterior branches.
Small hepatic vein tributaries mark the peripheral margins of each segment.
The caudate lobe drains directly to the IVC, not into the hepatic veins. For this reason, the
caudate lobe is often not affected in early cirrhosis since the direct drainage to the IVC
spares the caudate from increased venous pressures due to portal hypertension. This leads
to compensatory hypertrophy of the caudate lobe, which is a typical morphologic change of
early cirrhosis.
Similarly, direct venous drainage to the IVC allows the caudate lobe to bypass the increased hepatic
venous pressures: seen in Budd-Chiari syndrome. Compensatory hypertrophy of the caudate lobe may
preserve liver function in these patients.
The papillary process is a medial projection of the caudate lobe and can be mistaken for
ymphadenopathy or even a mass as it may appear separate from the medial process on a
single axial slice.
G!: 97