Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS; continued)
0.
50 pixel
Cr2 53.4
ppm
Right panel: Abnormal spectrum due to oligoastrocytoma, with elevated choline and decreased NAA.
A line connecting the tallest peaks (Hunter's angle, yellow line) would point down, which is a clue that the
spectrum is abnormal.
Left panel: Normal spectrum. Hunter's angle is pointing up like a plane at takeoff.
MRS can help detect inborn errors of metabolism and mitochondrial disorders.
Elevated NAA is characteristic of the leukodystrophy Canavan disease.
Elevated lactate: suggests mitochondrial encephalopathies such as Leigh syndrome.
MR Perfusion
MR perfusion (sometimes called perfusion-weighted imaging") refers to a family of
advanced techniques to detect changes in signal in the brain dependent on inflowing blood.
In dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MR perfusion, injection of a bolus of gadolinium-
based contrast media causes a magnetic field disturbance, which transiently decreases the
signal intensity on T2*-weighted images.
In dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MR perfusion, injection of a bolus of gadolinium-based
contrast media causes T1 shortening, which increases the signal intensity on T1-weighted
images.
In arterial spin labeling (ASL) MR perfusion, a noncontrast technique, radiofrequency pulses
at the neck magnetically label blood protons, which then travel to the brain where they are
imaged.
Three calculated parameters reflect microvascular effects (capillary perfusion): cerebral
blood flow (CBF), cerebral blood volume (CBV), and mean transit time (MTT = CBV/CBF).
Additional parameters like time to maximum (Tmax) and time to peak concentration (TTP)
also capture macrovascular effects such as contrast bolus arrival delay.
MR perfusion is most commonly employed for evaluation of brain tumors. High-grade
gliomas and metastases have higher relative CBV compared to low-grade gliomas or
lymphoma. In the post-treatment setting for high-grade gliomas, elevated CBV favors tumor
recurrence over pseudoprogression.
In acute stroke, perfusion imaging identifies ischemic penumbra (area at risk of infarction)
characterized by delayed contrast arrival (elevated Tmax) but compensated microvascular
autoregulation (at most moderate decrease in CBF, mismatched by elevated CBV).
The above parameters and perfusion imaging are further discussed in the stroke section.
Neuro Brain: 660