Adenosine stress - pharmacologic vasodilator
Adenosine has identical physiologic effects as dipyridamole but a more rapid effect. It may
also frequently cause atrioventricular block that is resolved most of the time by physical
exercise (hand grip or moving the legs or walking on a treadmill during infusion). Wheezing
is also seen, especially in patients with asthma. Because adenosine has an extremely short
half-life (K10 seconds), a reversal agent is usually not required.
Regadenoson - pharmacologic vasodilator
Regadenoson is a selective A2A (adenosine) receptor agonist with a 2-3 minute half-life.
It is easier to administer than adenosine with a convenient non-weight based fixed-dose
intravenous injection over 10 seconds. Its effects can be reversed with aminophylline.
Dobutamine stress - pharmacologic stress
Dobutamine is a B, agonist that increases myocardial oxygen demand. Dobutamine is used
when vasodilator is contraindicated (severe asthma, COPD, or recent caffeine).
Contraindications are the same as for exercise stress testing (see above).
IMAGING PROTOCOLS
Single-day Tc-99m sestumibi/letrofosmin perfusion SPECT
Tc-99m sestamibi or tetrofosmin perfusion SPECT is most commonly performed as a single-
day study. Rest images are first obtained after intravenous injection of 8-10 mCi Tc-99m
radiotracer. After background activity has cleared in 1-4 hours, stress images are obtained
with an additional 25-30 mCi (three times rest dose) administered during peak exercise, or
following pharmacologic stress.
Imaging is performed 45-90 minutes post-injection for resting studies, and at 30 minutes
for exercise stress because of faster liver activity clearance. Since there is no redistribution,
imaging can be delayed after tracer administration.
Gated SPECT images show wall motion at time of imaging, while perfusion images show
perfusion at time ofinjection. Therefore, severely ischemic territories may sometimes not
show evidence of regional wall motion abnormalities. If wall motion is abnormal in an
ischemia territory, this typically indicates myocardial stunning, a highly specific feature for
significant obstructive coronary artery disease.
Two-day Tc-99m sestamibi/letrofosmin perfusion SPECT
By performing the stress and rest studies on separate days, maximum dose (25-30 mCi)
of radiotracer can be administered for optimal image quality, and interference by residual
activity from the first study is minimized. This protocol is usually used in obese patients.
Also, if the stress study is performed first and is normal, the rest study can be safely
omitted. This is currently the preferred protocol due to shorter test duration and lower
radiation dose.
Thallium stress-redistribution (rest) SPECT
Because thallium undergoes redistribution, imaging is performed immediately (within
10-15 minutes) post-exercise and approximately 3-4 hours later once redistribution has
occurred. Both sets of images can be obtained after a single injection of 3 mCi thallium, or
two separate injections with 2 mCi administered at peak exercise for the stress images, and
an additional 1 mCi administered before the second image set to ensure adequate thallium
is available for redistribution.
Thallium is not often used for myocardial perfusion imaging because of its long 73-hour half-
life and high radiation dose. However, it is used for viability imaging at sites without access
to a PET scanner.
Cardiac: 490