INTRAMURAL HEMATOMA (IMH)
adventitia
media
intima
aorticl lumen
aortic lumen
Rupture of vasa vasorum creates crescent-shaped hemorrhage within the media (in cross-sectional view, top right and below left).
There may be associated aneurysm.
Thei intimai is always intact. IMH can be thought of as ar noncommunicating: dissection.
Intramural hematoma on non-contrast CT:
Intramural hematoma on contrast-enhanced
Unenhanced CT shows very faint crescent of
CT: Contrast-enhanced CT in a different patient
hyperdense (50 HU) hemorrhage in the descending
shows a crescentic, hyperattenuating (50 HU) rim
aorta (arrows).
reflecting intramural hematoma (arrows). There is no
disruption of the aortic lumen.
Intramural hematoma (IMH) is a variant of dissection where blood collects within the media,
without an intimal flap to connect the intramural hematoma with the aortic lumen. IMH is
likely due to rupture of the vasa vasorum, small blood vessels that supply the aortic wall.
Similar to dissection, IMH may be secondary to hypertension or trauma.
Clinically, IMH can present identically to aortic dissection with acute tearing back pain. The
treatment recommendations for IMH are the same as dissection regarding involvement of
the ascending versus descending aorta.
In high-risk patients, unenhanced phase is performed specifically for evaluation of IMH,
followed by CTA of the chest, abdomen and pelvis.
In low-risk patients, CTA of the chest is monitored by the radiologist; if there is wall
thickening, noncontrast scan 6+ hours later can evaluate for IMH versus vasculitis.
The key imaging finding of IMH is a peripheral nyperattenuating (60-70 HU) crescent within
the aorta, best seen on noncontrast CT. Displaced intimal calcification is another important
imaging feature, and best appreciated on noncontrast phase.
An ulcerlike projection is focal contrast enhancement extending from the aortic lumen into
an IMH via a visible communication (neck >3 mm); it has a poor prognosis. An intramural
blood pool also represents focal contrast enhancement within an IMH but has a nearly
imperceptible communication to the aortic lumen; its prognosis is unclear.
Vascular: 545