Online and offline screening
Typically, most screening mammography is interpreted offline, where a batch of exams is
reviewed in bulk some time after the films were taken.
Online screening, where women have mammography performed and then wait to get a
final report from the radiologist, leads to more imaging being performed and more false-
positives, with the same cancer detection rate.
In contrast to screening mammography, all diagnostic mammography is performed "online"
as a monitored exam with the patient staying for all possible imaging and the final results/
recommendations before leaving.
DIAGNOSTIC MAMMOGRAPHY
Indications for diagnostic mammography
Diagnostic mammography is usually performed for a breast problem (pain, lump, skin
thickening, nipple discharge).
Other indications for diagnostic mammography include annual mammography in an
asymptomatic woman with a past history of breast cancer, short interval follow-up (following
of BI-RADS 3 lesions), and evaluation of an abnormality found on screening mammogram.
Diagnostic mammography procedure
Any mammographic abnormality is first localized in three-dimensional space, then worked-
up with special problem-solving techniques, which are discussed later in this section.
Often, ultrasound is added at the radiologist's discretion.
Each patient waits until all imaging is completed before receiving a summary of the final
interpretation and recommendations from the radiologist.
APPROACH TO INTERPRETING A MAMMOGRAM
Evaluate image quality and adequacy
The first step in evaluating a mammogram is to determine if the study is technically
adequate.
There should be adequate tissue imaged on both the CC and MLO views. The posterior
nipple line is a line drawn from the nipple to the pectoralis muscle = or edge of the film on
the CC view if the pectoralis is not visualized. The posterior nipple lines drawn on the CC and
MLO views should be within 1 cm of each other.
CC
MLO
On the MLO view, the pectoral muscle
should be convex anteriorly and visible at
least to the level of the nipple.
The image must be free from blur and artifacts. The trabeculae should be sharp; if blur is
present, then benign calcifications can be mistaken for suspicious amorphous calcifications,
and subtle calcifications can be missed entirely.
The nipple of each breast should be in profile in at least one view.
Breast: 377