Spinal osteomyelitis / discitis
Sagittal T1-weighted MRI shows
Sagittal T2-weighted fat suppressed Sagittal T1-weighted post-contrast
hypointense marrow signal of
MRI shows hyperintense marrow MRI with fat suppression shows
two adjacent vertebral bodies in edema in the affected vertebral avid enhancement of the affected
the lower thoracic spine (yellow bodies with subtle focal narrowing vertebral bodies and mild epidural
arrows).
of the disc space (red arrow).
enhancement (blue arrow)
traversing the disc space.
Discitis with epidural extension. Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Isolated discitis is unique to children, due to the presence of blood vessels directly feeding
the intervertebral disc. In adults, infection can spread through the disk, but in children
infection begins in the disc.
A typical clinical history of discitis is a young child up to 4 years old with preceding upper
respiratory tract infection and back pain or refusal to sit. Discitis most commonly occurs in
the lumbar spine in young children.
Less commonly, discitis may occur in pre-teen children in the thoracic spine.
The initial radiographic findings are disc space narrowing and vertebral end plate
irregularity. These findings may be subtle. Plain films may also be normal. Because persistent
back pain is never normal in children, further evaluation with MRI is recommended if clinical
suspicion for discitis is high.
MRI shows narrowing of the disc space, with bone marrow edema of two adjacent vertebral
bodies. The affected vertebral bodies may enhance, and enhancement and edema may
extend into the soft tissues and epidural space.
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO)
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) is a nonpyogenic, inflammatory disorder
that can mimic osteomyelitis. It tends to occur in lower extremity long bones.
CRMO is typically a diagnosis of exclusion and is self-limited. Biopsy may need to be
performed to exclude pyogenic infection.
The key imaging finding is migratory lytic and sclerotic lesions in time and space. CRMO may
be indistinguishable from pyogenic osteomyelitis on radiographs and MRI. Unlike infectious
osteomyelitis, CRMO does not feature soft tissue abscess, bony sequestra, or fistula.
CRMO is associated with SAPHO syndrome, characterized by:
Synovitis
Hyperostosis
Acne
Osteitis
Pustulosis
Peds: 1171