ARTERIAL INTERVENTIONS
TRAUMA
General considerations
Trauma accounts for the majority of IR emergencies. Level 1 trauma centers must have IR
procedures available 24 hours a day.
Management of traumatic solid organ injury depends on the degree of injury and
hemodynamics of the patient. Conservative management involves resuscitation, monitoring
of vitals and laboratory values and serial exams, and is best for stable patients with low-
grade solid organ injury. IR angiography and embolization are best for stable patients with
moderate-to-high grade organ injuries and CT findings showing contrast extravasation
or pseudoaneurysm. IR embolization can be applied to either contained or uncontained
hemorrhage, with the intention of avoiding surgery. Management of high-grade injuries can
vary based on the organ involved.
Aortic injury
CTA is the gold standard for evaluation of suspected traumatic aortic injury.
Open surgical repair is the gold standard treatment for acute traumatic aortic injury with
endovascular stent-graft repair becoming more commonly performed recently.
Aortic trauma: Catheter aortogram shows a large,
Post-endograft repair aortogram shows stent-graft in
fusiform pseudoaneurysm (arrows) of the aortic
place with good opacification of the arch vessels.
isthmus, distal to the brachiocephalic artery.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Renal trauma
Renal trauma can be classified as blunt (>80% of injuries), penetrating (such as gunshot
or stab wound), or iatrogenic. Hematuria is usually present with renal trauma, regardless
of etiology. A horseshoe kidney is especially susceptible to traumatic injury as it is not
protected by the inferior ribs and may be compressed against the vertebral column.
The Organ Injury Scale (OIS) from the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma
(AAST) Classification is the most widely used classification of renal injury. This scale is further
discussed in the "Genitourinary imaging" chapter.
Grades I-III include nonexpanding hematomas or parenchymal laceration without collecting system injury.
These injuries are usually managed conservatively.
Grade IV includes a deep parenchymal laceration which extends to the collecting system, causing the CT
finding of extravasation of opacified urine on delayed imaging. Injury to the renal vessels with contained
hemorrhage is also OIS grade IV, often treated with endovascular coil embolization as in the case below.
Grade V (most severe) injury is a shattered kidney with avulsion of the renal hilum. Treatment is surgical.
IR: 604