Dose reduction in fluoroscopic procedures (continued)
Decrease the source-to-image distance. The image intensifier (II) should always be as close
to the patient as feasible. It is ok to "ride" the II up and down during the procedure, in order
to best reduce source-to-image distance while maintaining sufficient space to work.
Cone-in the image as much as possible. Once the basic anatomy is seen on the initial images,
there is no need to image the full field of view every time. This is especially important for
hip arthrography, where the pelvic sidewalls may be repeatedly radiated.
Make it fun! It's a friendly competition to play to see who can get the lowest dose, as long as
the procedure is done safely, accurately, and with minimal discomfort to the patient.
Shoulder
Normal shoulder arthrogram: Initial image (left image) demonstrates ideal BB marker placement (arrow) for a
"rotator interval" approach, at the upper inner quadrant of the humeral head. A fluoroscopic image should be
obtained after initial injection of contrast (middle image). Post-procedure image demonstrates normal contrast
filling the joint, without contrast extravasation into the subacromial-subdetoid bursa.
Similar to hip arthrography, diagnostic and therapeutic shoulder injections are very
common. For diagnostic arthrography, a total intra-articular volume of 10-12 mL is typically
injected.
Communication of the glenohumeral joint with the ubatroma/subdetod bursa indicates a
full-thickness rotator cuff tear (presuming that there is no history of prior surgery).
Hip
Diagnostic hip MR arthrography is commonly performed to assess for labral tears and
chondral injury. A total intra-articular volume of 10-12 mL is typically administered.
Therapeutic hip injections are commonly performed to reduce osteoarthritis-related pain
and inflammation.
Wrist
For diagnostic wrist injections, approximately 3 mL of injectate is administered. Injecting
more contrast can increase the chance of contrast extravasating out of the joint, which can
complicate image interpretation.
It is important to inject the contrast under real-time fluoroscopy to visualize any abnormal
communication between the radiocarpal compartment (where contrast is injected) and
either the distal radioulnar joint or the mid-carpal space.
Communication between radiocarpal compartment and distal radioulnar joint indicates a
tear of the TFC (with an example provided in the "Wrist" section of this chapter).
Communication between the radiocarpal compartment and the midcarpal space
demonstrates tears of either the scapholunate or lunotriquetral ligaments.
MSK: 1081