PEDIATRIC GENITOURINARY
HYDRONEPHROSIS AND HyDROURETER
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR)
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is abnormal retrograde reflux of urine from the bladder into the
ureter, which predisposes to acute pyelonephritis, renal scarring, and irreversible loss of
renal function. VUR can be primary (due to an abnormally short intravesicular portion of the
distal ureter) or secondary (due to distal obstruction, such as from posterior urethral valves
or neurogenic bladder).
The typical imaging evaluation of a child with a febrile UTI is controversial and may involve
renal ultrasound and voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG). Noncontrast ultrasound is not
sensitive for the detection of reflux, although the presence of urothelial thickening is
suggestive of reflux. Studies suggest that approximately 5% of children with a UTI and a
normal ultrasound have VUR.
Siblings of patients diagnosed with reflux are typically screened with ultrasound: the
prevalence of siblings with asymptomatic VUR is 25-50%.
Fluoroscopic VCUG is often preferred as the initial study for evaluation of reflux because it
provides anatomic details about the upper tract and also allows evaluation of the urethra.
Contrast-enhanced ultrasound is increasingly being used for the assessment of VUR, and the
posterior urethra can be assessed via transperineal views.
In boys, partial posterior urethral valves may be a cause of UTI.
Grading of reflux is based on VCUG:
: Reflux into ureter only, with normal ureteral and calyceal morphology.
I: Reflux into non-dilated renal calyces, with normal ureteral and calyceal morphology.
III: Reflux into renal collecting system, with blunting of the calyces (loss of normal "spiky" appearance of
calyces).
IV: Reflux into moderately dilated ureter.
V: Reflux into severely dilated and tortuous ureter.
Bilateral grade IV reflux: Fluoroscopic
stored image from a VCUG shows
moderate calyceal and ureteral
dilation.
The goal of any treatment of VUR is to prevent pyelonephritis and the resultant renal
scarring which can lead to irreversible loss of renal function. The treatment can be either
medical (prophylactic antibiotics) or surgical, depending on the grade.
Grades I-III are initially treated medically (prophylactic antibiotics). Higher grade reflux often is treated
surgically.
Approximately 90% of grade I and II reflux will spontaneously regress after a few years.
Peds: 1145