BENIGN GASTRIC MASSES
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) (benign)
Submucosal GIST: Axial (left image) and coronal (right image) contrast-enhanced CT shows a well-
circumscribed, relatively homogeneous mass with a central focus of necrosis (arrows), located in the
submucosal posterior wall of the gastric antrum. Incidental cholecystectomy clips are seen on the axial CT.
Case courtesy Chery! Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women' 's Hospital.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is the most common submucosal gastric tumor and
may be benign or malignant. While GIST may occur anywhere in the GI tract, the stomach
is the most common location. The tumor arises from the interstitial cells of Cajal, which are
pacemaker cells that drive peristalsis.
Risk of malignancy is determined by size and number of mitoses. Regardless of size and
number of mitoses, gastric GIST is less likely to be malignant compared to similar-sized GISTS
in the duodenum, jejunum/ileum, or rectum.
Small gastric GISTS are usually asymptomatic but may be a cause of melena.
On imaging, a smooth endoluminal surface is characteristic due to its submucosal location.
Larger tumors tend to become exophytic, or less commonly to invade/uicerate into the
mucosa and cause melena.
The differential diagnosis of a submucosal gastric mass includes:
Mesenchymal tumors (GIST, fibroma, lipoma,
Carcinoid.
neurofibromas, etc).
Ectopic pancreatic rest.
Lipoma
Al lipoma is a benign, submucosal, mesenchymal neoplasm. At fluoroscopy, a gastric lipoma
is indistinguishable from a GIST. Fatty attenuation on CT is diagnostic of a lipoma.
Ectopic pancreatic rest
An ectopic pancreatic rest is a focus of heterotopic pancreatic tissue in the gastric
submucosa. The ectopic tissue is susceptible to pancreatic diseases, including pancreatitis
and carcinoma.
On imaging, the classic appearance is an umbilicated submucosal nodule, with the
umbilication representing a focus of normal epithelium. The ulceration is not always seen, in
which case imaging will show a nonspecific submucosal gastric mass.
GI: 190