STRUCTURAL CORONARY ARTERY ANOMALIES
Coronary artery anomalies: Overview
Coronary artery anomalies are rare and include those of the artery origin, course, or
termination. These can be malignant or benign. A malignant coronary artery anomaly
carries an increased risk of sudden death (in up to 40% of patients), often associated with
exercise.
CCTA is the best modality to evaluate anomalous coronary artery anatomy.
Anomalies of coronary artery origin include:
Coronary artery arising from the pulmonary artery, which is malignant. Either the right or left main
coronary artery may arise from the pulmonary artery. Both are very rare.
Anomalous left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA).
Anomalous right coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ARCAPA).
RCA arising from left coronary sinus.
Left main coronary artery (LMCA) arising from right coronary sinus.
Left circumflex (LCx) or left anterior descending (LAD) arising from right coronary sinus.
Any artery arising from the noncoronary sinus.
Anomalies of coronary artery course include:
Interarterial course (between the aorta and pulmonary artery) of an anomalous coronary artery is
malignant.
Intramural course (within the aortic wall) of a coronary artery is malignant.
Retroaortic, prepulmonic, and septal (subpulmonic) coronary artery courses are all considered benign.
Myocardial bridging (described later in this chapter) is often benign.
Anomaly of coronary artery termination:
Coronary artery fistula (described later in the chapter)
Benign coronary artery anomaly
Prepulmonic (benign) course of the left anterior
PA
descending (LAD) coronary artery:
Axial image from a gated coronary CT shows
an anomalous course of the LAD, which runs
anterior (arrows) to the pulmonary artery (PA).
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of
Virginia Health System.
An aberrant coronary artery course is considered clinically benign if the coronary artery does
not course between the aorta and the pulmonary artery.
Malignant coronary artery anomaly
Anomalous intramural course of either the RCA or LMCA is seen when the vessel courses
through the wall of the aorta for a short segment. This anomaly is associated with sudden
death. There is typically a slit-like configuration of the coronary artery on CCTA.
The treatment of intramural coronary artery is bypass, reimplantation, or the unroofing procedure.
Cardiac: 509