Brodie abscess
Axial (left image) and sagittal CT images through the knee demonstrate a lytic lesion (yellow arrows) of the
tibial metaphysis with surrounding reactive sclerosis (red arrows) and overlying pretibial soft tissue swelling
(blue arrows).
Brodie abscess is a characteristic lesion of subacute osteomyelitis, consisting of a walled-off
intra-osseous abscess surrounded by granulation tissue and sclerotic bone.
Chronic osteomyelitis
Chronic osteomyelitis is an indolent infection lasting more than 6 weeks. Devascularized,
necrotic bone leads to a sequestrum surrounded by granulation tissue and involucrum.
Chronic osteomyelitis can cause a mixed lytic and sclerotic appearance, with a thickened
cortex.
It can be difficult to differentiate between active and inactive chronic osteomyelitis. Serial
radiographs in active chronic osteomyelitis may show development of periosteal reaction.
Sclerosing osteomyelitis, also known as osteomyelitis of Garré, is an uncommon form of
chronic osteomyelitis characterized by sclerosis and thickening of bone. The differential
diagnosis of sclerosing osteomyelitis includes lymphoma, sclerotic metastasis, and osteoid
osteoma.
Specific organisms causing osteomyelitis
Staphylococcus: Staph. aureus is the most common cause of hematogenous osteomyelitis.
Salmonella: Osteomyelitis from Salmonella is typically seen in patients with sickle cell
disease, with a propensity to affect the diaphysis. It may be difficult to distinguish between
diaphyseal bone infarct and osteomyelitis in sickle cell patients.
Pseudomonas: Osteomyelitis from Pseudomonas aeruginosa is classically caused by a
puncture wound of the foot through a sneaker.
Tuberculosis: The most common musculoskeletal infection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is
infection of the spine, also known as Pott disease.
Specific locations
Hand and finger: The metacarpals and phalanges may become infected after a bite wound.
Toe: A stubbed great toe with nail-bed injury is at risk for osteomyelitis of the distal phalanx,
due to the location of periosteum immediately adjacent to the nail bed.
Spine: Vertebral osteomyelitis/discitis in an adult may be caused by hematogenous arterial
spread, spinal surgery, or spread of a genitourinary infection through the epidural venous
Batson plexus. Infection begins in the subendplate region of the vertebral body and
subsequently spreads to the endplate, intervertebral disc, and adjacent vertebral body.
In contrast, in children discitis is thought to represent direct hematogenous seeding of the persistently
vascularized disc.
MSK: 977