FETAL BRAIN
Ventriculomegaly
Transverse ultrasound of the fetal head shows severe
symmetrical dilation of the lateral ventricles, with
the calipers measuring 14 mm. Regardless of the
gestational age, the lateral ventricles should always
measure <10 mm. Note the dangling choroid (arrow).
Ventriculomegaly is enlargement of the cerebral ventricles. The term hydrocephalus is
usually avoided because it implies ventriculomegaly due to obstruction.
Throughout gestation, the lateral ventricles should each measure less than 10 mm when
measured at the atrium. The atrium is the confluence of the lateral ventricle, temporal
horn, and occipital horn. The normal choroid plexus has a rounded border in this location.
Mild ventriculomegaly: 10-12 mm; moderate: 12-15 mm; marked: >15 mm.
Normally, the choroid plexus fills the lateral ventricle. The dangling choroid sign represents
the dependent drooping of choroid plexus seen in ventriculomegaly.
Ventriculomegaly may be present even in a ventricle measuring <10 mm if there is >3 mm of fluid between
the medial margin of the ventricle and the choroid.
Ventriculomegaly is a sign that something else is wrong, with a diverse array of etiologies:
Primary CNS structural (aqueductal stenosis, Dandy Walker, Chiari II, holoprosencephaly, agenesis of the
corpus callosum).
Genetic (trisomies 13 and 18).
Destructive (due to infection, hemorrhage, or infarct).
Idiopathic.
Anencephaly
Anencephaly:
Sagittal paramedian 17-week fetal
ultrasound through the head and thorax
shows lack of calvarium above the level
of the orbits. Echogenic foci superior to
the anencephalic head likely represent
angiomatous stroma (arrow).
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD,
Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Anencephaly is a lethal anomaly with complete lack of development of the calvarium and
destruction of the fetal cerebral cortex and calvarium above the orbits due to toxins in the
amniotic fluid. Anencephaly may cause polyhydramnios due to impairment in swallowing.
AFP is elevated in anencephaly, due to direct exposure of neural tissue to the amniotic fluid.
Angiomatous stroma is residual neural-type tissue that may be tethered above the head
and may be confused with an encephalocele.
The differential of anencephaly is amniotic band syndrome, which is typically asymmetric.
Obstetrics: 348