MUCOPOMSACCHARIDOSES
Viucopolypacchandoses are a group of lysosomal storage disorders (LSD) including Hurlers,
Morquio, and Hunters. These disorders share common radiographic findings and are
typically distinguished clinically and biochemically.
Key radiographic findings include oval vertebral bodies with anterior beaking, thickened
clavicles and ribs, and undertubulated bones. Other findings include:
Madelung deformity of the wrists wedge-shaped proximal carpal row, with radius shifted towards ulna).
Thickened calvarium with a. J-shaped sella.
Pelvis with tall and flared iliac wings (opposite of achondroplasia).
Wide tapering metacarpal bones.
Hurlers features anterior beaking of the vertebral bodies, primarily inferiorly.
Morquio also features anterior beaking of middle portion of the vertebral body (mnemonic:
Morquio for middle).
Morquio is associated with spinal stenosis and atlantoaxial instability, with most common cause of death
being C2 cervical myelopathy.
METABOLIC BONE DISEASE
Rickets
a
Chest radiograph in a child with rickets shows widening of the Frontal radiograph in the wrist of a different
rib epiphyseal cartilage, creating the classic rachitic rosary
patient shows metaphyseal fraying and
appearance (yellow arrows).
cupping (red arrows).
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston Children's
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University
Hospital.
of Virginia Health System.
Rickets is a metabolic bone disorder caused by inadequate vitamin D or abnormal vitamin
D metabolism. It is characterized by abnormal calcification at the zone of provisional
calcification (ZPC), leading to abnormal physeal development.
Rickets mostly affects growing bones, though is not seen in newborns as maternal vitamin D is still
functional.
Radiographs show expansion, irregularity, fraying, and cupping of the long bone
metaphyses, often associated with adjacent metaphyseal periosteal new bone.
Other findings of rickets include bowing of the legs, osteopenia, and fractures. The classic
rachitic rosary represents anterior cupping of the ribs with widening of the rib epiphyseal
cartilage. The skull may become demineralized.
MR findings demonstrate loss of black-white-black line corresponding to an indistinct ZPC.
Oncogenic rickets is a variant of rickets seen with hemangiopericytoma or nonossifying
fibroma due to tumor metabolites that cause deranged vitamin D metabolism.
Peds: 1176