OTHER TYPES OF PET/CT
Gallium-68 DOTATATE (GaTate)
Gallium-68 is a generator-produced positron emitter
with a half-life of 68 minutes.
Ga-68 DOTATATE is a somatostatin analog that is used in
the imaging of tumors with high somatostatin receptor
(SSTR) expression, including neuroendocrine tumors,
pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma, neuroblastoma,
and meningioma.
DOTATATE PET/CT is the new first-line diagnostic imaging
modality for neuroendocrine tumors, replacing the
older Octreoscan and MIBG scintigraphy (discussed later
in this chapter).
DOTATATE and FDG PET/CT are complementary exams,
helping to identify both well-differentiated (high
DOTATATE uptake) and poorly differentiated (high FDG
uptake) tumors.
PET agents for prostate cancer imaging
Because of the limitation of FDG PET/CT in prostate
Coronal PET MIP shows physiologic
cancer imaging, a number of alternative PET
distribution of Ga-68 DOTATATE. Note
radiotracers have been developed in the past decade.
intense uptake in the spleen, followed
by the adrenals, kidneys/bladder,
Carbon-11/F-18 choline are biomarkers of cell
pituitary, salivary glands, thyroid, liver,
membrane metabolism and are FDA-approved for
and bowel.
imaging biochemically recurrent prostate cancer with
high PSA levels, but are not in widespread use.
PSMA ligands such as ProstaScint and Ga-68 PSMA
target the prostate membrane specific antigen (PSMA)
which is highly expressed in prostate cancer. PSMA
PET/CT is highly sensitive for biochemically recurrent
prostate cancer with low PSA levels, but is not yet FDA-
approved.
F-18 fluciclovine (Axumin) is an amino acid analog
which targets amino acid transporters that are
overexpressed in prostate cancer. maging is performed
only minutes after injection of the tracer, which limits
-
any significant urinary excretion. It is FDA-approved for
detection of biochemically recurrent prostate cancer.
F-18 sodium fluoride (F-18 NaF) is an analog of the
hydroxyl group in hydroxyapatite bone crystals and a
biomarker of osteoblastic activity. It is highly sensitive
for the detection of prostate cancer bone metastases,
but is not routinely used due to low specificity, high
cost, and limited availability.
Coronal PET MIP shows normal
distribution of F-18 fluciclovine. Note
intense uptake in liver and pancreas,
and variable uptake in muscles. Foci of
uptake at the right arm represent the
injection site.
Nucs: 451