Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS)
ATENCRO bonomel
3 mm
.
length
Chennell Abroin)
mm
15
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis: Ultrasound of the pylorus demonstrates a thickened muscular wall (arrows
denote the entire pylorus; measurements should be obtained of one wall only, from echogenic mucosa to
echogenic serosa, as diagrammed on the annotated image on the right) and an elongated channel length.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS) is muscular hypertrophy of the pylorus, which classically
causes progressive, projectile, non-bilious emesis in firstborn males (affected 4 times more
than females) age 2-12 weeks old. HPS is the most common surgically treated cause of
vomiting in infants.
Although there is a genetic association, most cases are sporadic and idiopathic.
A: suggestive plain film finding is the caterpillar sign, which describes the undulating contour
of the gastric wall peristalsing against an obstructed pylorus.
Ultrasound criteria vary by institution; typical criteria for diagnosis include wall thickness >3
mm (measuring from echogenic mucosa to echogenic serosa) and a channel length >15 mm.
Positive cases will not show feeds passing through the pylorus. An important pitfall to be
aware of is imaging a collapsed, normal gastric antrum.
Treatment is pyloroplasty, with IV fluid and electrolyte replacement while waiting for
surgery.
The main differential consideration is pylorospasm, for which close clinical follow-up is
recommended. Visualization of gastric contents passing through the pylorus is suggestive of
pylorospasm, which generally features a normal-appearing pylorus.
Appendicitis
Appendicitis is the most common reason to perform abdominal surgery in a child, typically
presenting over the age of 4 years and rare in infants. Abdominal pain is usually present, but
the clinical presentation in children may be atypical and diagnosis can be challenging.
Ultrasound is the first test of choice for evaluation of suspected appendicitis in children. A
swollen (>6 mm), incompressible, blind-ending tubular structure in the right lower quadrant
is a typical imaging appearance.
The most sensitive sonographic finding of appendicitis is inflamed, echogenic peri-appendiceal fat.
An echogenic and shadowing appendicolith, increased mural vascularity, non-compressbility, and localized
reproducible pain with pressure are also reliable signs of appendicitis.
MRI is the preferred modality for assessing children after an equivocal ultrasound.
Examination can be performed in roughly 10 minutes, with the most sensitive finding being
infiltration of perrappendiceal fat on T2-weighted, non-fat saturated sequences.
Peds: 1125