ADDITIONAL TUMORS
Myxoma
Axial STIR MRI
Post-contrast axial T1-weighted MRI with fat
suppression
Myxoma: There is al homogeneously hyperintense, near fluid signal intensity intra-muscular mass (yellow
arrows) located vastus medialis. The mass demonstrates faint wispy enhancement (red arrow).
A myxoma is a benign soft tissue tumor. The myxoid extracellular matrix creates a near fluid-
signal intensity appearance, with minimal enhancement. They tend to occur in muscles.
Mazabraud syndrome is fibrous dysplasia with intramuscular myxomas.
Synovial sarcoma
FDP
FCU
Axial T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression
Post-contrast T1-weighted MRI with fat
suppression
Synovial sarcoma: There is a T2 hyperintense, enhancing mass (yellow arrows) at the volar/ulnar aspect of
the wrist, interposed between the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) and flexor digitorum profundus (FDP). Note that
although the mass is near fluid signal intensity on the fluid sensitive sequence, there is still some internal
complexity with whorl-like regions of low signal (red arrow).
The differential of a small, T2 hyperintense, enhancing, circumscribed mass would also include nerve sheath
tumor.
Synovial sarcoma is a high-grade mesenchymal tumor typically occurring in adolescents and
young adults.
The term synovial in its name is highly misleading, as this tumor has nothing to do with
synovial tissue or joints. However, it does have a propensity to occur in the vicinity of joints,
and the term likely arrived from pathologic confusion in the early twentieth century.
Synovial sarcoma is relatively homogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted images, usually
isointense to fluid. The classic teaching is that a fluid signal intensity mass in a younger patient
that does not communicate with a joint could be synovial sarcoma and contrast should be
administered. In practice, however, these lesions are usually somewhat more complex than
simple fluid and windowing of the images can make the internal complexity more conspicuous.
MSK: 970