Olfactory neuroblastoma esthesioneuroblasiome,
Esthesioneuroblastoma with intracranial extension: Axial and coronal post-contrast T1-weighted MRI
demonstrate an avidly enhancing lobulated mass (arrows) extending from the right superior nasal cavity into
the anterior cranial fossa. Multiple cysts are noted at the tumor-brain interface.
Olfactory neuroblastoma, previously known as esthesioneuroblastoma, is a malignant neural
crest-derived tumor that arises from olfactory epithelium in the superior nasal cavity.
When the tumor extends intracranially, the presence of cysts at the margins of the
intracranial portion is highly suggestive of olfactory neuroblastoma.
Mucosal melanoma
Mucosal melanoma refers to malignant melanoma that arises from mucosal epithelium,
which is uncommon compared to cutaneous melanoma.
The head and neck, most commonly in the sinonasal tract, is the most common site.
On MRI, internal high signal on T1-weighted images corresponding to melanin can be
suggestive of the diagnosis, but these tumors are frequently amelanotic.
Lymphoma
The most common histology is diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, although in Asia and Latin
America, extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is more common.
B-cell ymphomas predominate in the paranasal sinuses, while T-cell lymphomas
predominate in the nasal cavity.
Extramedullary plasmacytoma
Solitary extramedulary plasmacytoma is a plasma cell malignancy presenting as an
extraosseous soft tissue mass; multiple myeloma is the systemic form.
Extramedullary plasmacytoma usually affects the head and neck region, most commonly in
the sinonasal tract.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft tissue malignancy in the head and neck in
children and the most common sinonasal sarcoma.
Half of head and neck rhabdomyosarcomas occur in a so-called parameningeal site: nasal
cavity, nasopharynx, paranasal sinuses, infratempora. and pterygopalatine fossae, middle
ear, or mastoid. Parameningeal sites carry an unfavorable prognosis, while the orbits and
other non-parameningeal head and neck locations are considered favorable sites.
Neuro Head & Neck: 766