Lipoma and lipomatous hypertrophy of the inter-atrial septum
Lipomas are common benign cardiac tumors that have a spherical shape and well-
circumscribed margin, typically located in the right atrium, arise from the endocardial
surface and project into the atrial cavity. They follow fat signal intensity on all MRI
sequences and do not enhance.
Lipomatous hypertrophy of thei interatrial septum: Axial and coronal noncontrast CT demonstrates ai focal area
of fat attenuation at the inter-atrial septum, along the right heart border (arrows).
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Lipomatous hypertrophy of the inter-atrial septum (LHIS) represents proliferation of fatty
deposits within the inter-atrial septum, typically along the lateral right heart border. The
fossa ovalis is spared, resulting in a dumbbell configuration of the fatty tissue.
LHIS is an incidental finding that does not require treatment. It is important to not mistake it
for a cardiac mass. Unlike lipomas, LHIS does not have a capsule on histopathology.
An exceedingly rare differential consideration of a fatty cardiac mass is liposarcoma.
Papillary fibroelastoma
Multiplanar reformatted CTA images at level of the aortic valve show a trileaflet aortic valve and a round
pedunculated lesion attached to the noncoronary cusp thought to represent a papillary fibroelastoma (arrows).
Surgical resection confirmed the diagnosis.
Papillary fibroelastoma is the most common tumor of the cardiac valves.
The most common location is the aortic valve on the side of the aorta.
On MRI, papillary fibroelastomas have low T2 signal due to high fibrous content.
While these tumors are usually small in size, they may promote thrombus formation, detach
and embolize, or affect valvular function.
Hemangioma
Hemangiomas can occur in any cardiac chamber and involve the pericardium.
Similar to elsewhere in the body, hemangiomas are hyperintense on T2, intensely enhancing
due to rich vascularity, with possible flow voids and calcifications.
Cardiac: 536