Conjoined twins
Conjoined twins are caused by late (>13 days) incomplete division of embryo.
COMPLICATIONS OF MONOCHORIONIC TWINS
Twin embolization syndrome
When one monochorionic twin dies in utero, the surviving twin is at risk for twin
embolization syndrome, which can cause CNS, gastrointestinal, or renal infarcts.
In general, prognosis for a surviving monochorionic twin is very poor when one twin dies in
utero. In contrast, prognosis is generally good for a surviving dichorionic twin when one twin
dies in utero.
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS)
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a complication of monochorionic twins (either
mono- or diamniotic) and is the result of abnormal vascular communications in the single
shared placenta, with disproportionate blood flow between the fetuses.
The donor twin transfers excess blood flow to the recipient twin. The donor twin is small
and has oligonydramnios. The recipient twin is larger and has polyhydramnios.
There are three criteria to diagnose TTTS by ultrasound:
1) Single shared placenta (monochorionic).
2) Disproportionate fetal sizes, with at least 25% discrepancy.
3) Disproportionate amniotic fluid, with the small twin having oligohydramnios and the large twin having
polyhydramnios.
There is a spectrum of severities of TTTS. In the earliest stages, the donor twin's bladder is
still visible and amniotic fluid discrepancy is mild. Later stages are marked by absent bladder,
marked fluid discrepancy, fetal hydrops or death.
twin 1
twin 2
Ultrasound of monochonon/dimmotc twins: Grayscale image with Doppler overlay (left) of twin #1 at level
of the pelvis shows normal appearance of two umbilical arteries, but no visualization of the bladder. Twin #1
also has moderate oligohydramnios with the amnionic membrane "stuck" to the body (yellow arrow), and size
discrepancy by gestational age. Twin #2 (right image) has a large bladder (red arrow) and mild polyhydramnios.
These findings are suggestive fori twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
A: stuck twin describes severe oligohydramnios in the donor (small) twin. A stuck twin has SO
little amniotic fluid that the amnion is wrapped around the twin like shrink wrap.
Treatment options of TTTS include laser ablation of placental arteriovenous connections,
therapeutic amniocentesis from the recipient (large, poly) twin, or selective coagulation of
the umbilical cord of the less viable twin.
Obstetrics: 336