Idiopathic and infectious causes of facial nerve enhancement
Axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrates right facial nerve enhancement in the IAC (yellow arrow)
and faint cochlea enhancement (red arrow), consistent with Ramsey Hunt syndrome in this patient with right
facial weakness, sensorineural hearing loss, and a rash in the EAC.
In addition to schwannoma and venous malformations, the differential diagnosis for
abnormal facial nerve enhancement includes infectious etiologies such as Lyme disease and
herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt syndrome) and idiopathic facial neuropathy.
Idiopathic facial neuropathy, eponymously named Bell's palsy, is the most common
syndrome of acute-onset, unilateral facial weakness.
Herpes simplex virus type-1 reactivation within the geniculate ganglion has been proposed as an etiology,
resulting in demyelination and inflammation of the facial nerve. Facial paralysis is usually preceded by a
viral prodrome.
History and physical examination is generally sufficient for diagnosis. Imaging is generally performed to
rule out other etiologies in patients presenting with atypical symptoms, recurrent symptoms, or slow
recovery. The majority of patients have a complete recovery within 6 months.
MRI demonstrates a uniformly enhancing, normal sized or mildly thickened facial nerve commonly
extending from the intracanalicular segment to the tympanic segment. Enhancement may persist
following clinical improvement.
Enhancement of the facial nerve accompanied by enhancement in the internal auditory
canal and labyrinth, and vesicles within the EAC are suggestive of Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
Lyme disease is caused by Borrelia burgdorferi. Clinically, these patients present with a rash
and can have arthritis and myocarditis.
Perineural tumor spread along the facial nerve
Parotid malignancies such as lymphoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma and adjacent skin
malignancies that secondarily invade the parotid gland have a propensity for perineural
spread along the facial nerve.
Facial nerve involvement occurs more frequently and in earlier stages in the extratemporal
portion of the facial nerve. Proximally, the stylomastoid foramen segment and the
descending segments can be involved.
MRI demonstrates enlargement of the facial nerve with patchy enhancement, enlargement
of the stylomastoid foramen, or loss of the normal fat signal surrounding the nerve within
the foramen.
Neuro Head & Neck: 820