Oncocytoma
SAG RK
Oncocytoma: Sagittal ultrasound through the right kidney (left image) demonstrates an exophytic solid renal
mass (arrows) that is isoechoic to cortex. Color Doppler suggests a spoke-wheel pattern of vascularity.
Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Oncocytoma is a benign renal tumor arising from tubular cells. Due to significant imaging
overlap with RCC, oncocytomas are usually biopsied or surgically resected.
On ultrasound, oncocytoma is indistinguishable from RCC. It has variable echogenicity. A
spoke-wheel vascular pattern is sometimes seen on color Doppler.
On CT/MRI, certain features can suggest oncocytoma, but cannot reliably differentiate it
from RCC. Features suggestive of oncocytoma include homogeneous enhancement and
a central scar. The segmental enhancement inversion sign can be a more specific feature,
referring to a "flip-flop" of enhancement of the tumor and central scar on early and late
phases.
Oncocytoma: Noncontrast CT (left image) shows an isodense renal mass (yellow arrows) containing a central
punctate focus of hyperattenuation (red arrow). The contrast-enhanced excretory phase CT (right image)
demonstrates that the mass enhances. There is a faint suggestion of a central focus of non-enhancement (red
arrows), corresponding to a central scar.
Diagnosis can be confirmed with percutaneous biopsy. Of note, oncocytic cells can be
found in the rare chromophobe RCC subtype. However, pathologists can usually distinguish
oncocytoma from the more common clear cell and papillary RCC subtypes.
Non-neoplastic solid renal masses
When evaluating a potential renal mass, it's critical to exclude non-neoplastic etiologies with
mass-like appearance.
Infection, especially focal pyelonephritis, can mimic a solid renal mass. Renal abscess may
be difficult to differentiate on imaging from a cystic renal cell carcinoma. Follow-up imaging
is usually performed to confirm resolution following treatment with antibiotics.
Renal arteriovenous malformation (AVM) will avidly enhance and can mimic a
hypervascular renal mass. One clue to the presence of an AVM would be asymmetric
enhancement of the renal vein on the affected side, due to early shunting of venous blood.
GU: 265