Graves disease (continued)
The key color Doppler finding is the thyroid inferno sign, which represents marked
hypervascularity caused by arteriovenous shunting and enlarged peripheral vessels.
Because of significant overlap in sonographic findings with Hashimoto thyroiditis, correlation
with laboratory findings is required.
Subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain thyroiditis)
Subacute (de Quervain) thyroiditis: Sagittal grayscale thyroid ultrasound (left image) demonstrates patchy
areas of decreased echogenicity with no discrete nodule. Color Doppler (right image) does not demonstrate
increased vascularity, in contrast to Graves disease. Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD.
Subacute (de Quervain) thyroiditis is granulomatous inflammation of the thyroid, thought to
be viral in origin. It is the most common cause of a painful thyroid mass. The gland is usually
tender and adjacent cervical adenopathy is common.
Patients may present with transient nyperthyroidism due to follicular rupture and release
of thyroid hormones, followed by hypothyroidism after depletion of hormone stores. It is
usually diagnosed clinically.
Ultrasound findings include ill-defined, patchy areas of decreased echogenicity in the
involved regions. Vascularity is normal or decreased.
Subacute thyroiditis is treated with steroids. Follow-up ultrasound appearance can show a
dramatic response to treatment.
Multinodular gland
The term multinodular gland is preferred over multinodular goiter because goiter is a
generic term for an enlarged gland, which can have numerous causes.
On imaging, a multinodular gland will appear enlarged with innumerable mixed cystic and
solid nodules.
THYROID NODULE AND THYROID CANCER
Approach to a thyroid nodule
There are no definitive ultrasound features that distinguish benign from malignant nodules.
The American Thyroid Association (ATA) has developed guidelines for assessment of thyroid
nodules on ultrasound. These guidelines stress use of the sonographic pattern and size for
risk stratification and subsequent decision-making regarding FNA.
High-suspicion sonographic features include: microcalcirications, hypoechogenicity with
irregular margins, taller-than-wide shape.
Intermediate suspicion sonographic features include hypoechogenicity with regular margins.
Low and very-low suspicion sonographic features include hyperechoic or isoechoic solid
nodules with regular margins, spongiform echotexture, partially cystic nodules with
eccentric solid mass.
Neuro Head & Neck: 857