Osteochondral lesion of the talus (continued)
Osteochondral lesion of the talus can describe either osteochondritis dissecans from chronic
repetitive microtrauma (typically in younger patients) and acute traumatic osteochondral
defect.
Osteochondral lesions and their staging are discussed in the knee section.
In the talus, an osteochondral lesion appears on radiography as a crescentic lucency of the
talar dome. MR imaging is similar to MR imaging of knee osteochondral lesions, where
fluid undercutting the lesion or cystic change deep to the lesion indicates instability.
Hindfoot (tarsal) coalition
Abnormal fusion of two tarsal bones may be a cause of hindfoot pain. Hindfoot coalitions
often present in adolescence as the coalition begins to ossify. A coalition may be fibrous,
cartilaginous, or osseous.
The vast majority of hindfoot coalitions are either talocalcaneal (fusion of the talus and
calcaneus) or calcaneonavicular (fusion of the calcaneus and navicular).
Talocalcaneal coalition occurs most commonly at the middle subtalar facet.
Talocalcaneal coalition: Lateral radiograph of the ankle (left image) shows the classic Csign (yellow arrows)
due to fusion of the medial talus and sustentaculum tali. A fibrous coalition (red arrows) is confirmed on
the coronal CT (right image), with sclerosis and subchondral cysts of the middle subtalar facet.
The C: sign on the lateral radiograph represents a continuous C-shaped contour of the fused middle
subtalar facet (medial talus fused with the sustentaculum tali). The C sign is not sensitive for the detection
of talocalcaneal coalition, but may be helpful when seen.
The talar beak sign on the lateral radiograph describes a triangular-shaped beaking at the anterior-
superior aspect of the talus.
Calcaneonaviçular coalition is fusion between the anterior process of the calcaneus and the
navicular.
The anteater sign represents the elongated anterior process of the calcaneus which looks like an
anteater's nose on the lateral view.
MSK: 1003