CONGENITAL STRUCTURAL THORACIC DISEASE
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH)
CDH represents herniation of abdominal
contents into the thorax, most commonly
through a left posterior defect in the diaphragm
(Bochdalek = back).
The primary complication is psilateral
pulmonary hypoplasia. Depending on the
severity of the defect, contralateral hypoplasia
may be present if the lung is compressed in
utero.
Right-sided lesions with liver herniations are rare
and have a poor prognosis.
The key imaging finding is a mass in the thorax
displacing the mediastinum. At birth, the
herniated bowel may be fluid-filled and appear Congenital diaphragmatic hernia: Chest
solid. However, shortly after birth, air fills the
radiograph in a neonate shows multiple loops
bowel to create the typical appearance shown to of air-filled bowel herniated into the left thorax,
the right.
producing rightward displacement of the heart.
CDH is associated with bowel malrotation (95%),
neural tube defects, congenital heart disease,
Turner syndrome and Trisomy 21.
Overview of bronchopulmonary foregut malformations
normal vasculature
abnormal vasculature
bronchogenic
scimitar
CLH
CPAM
BPS
AVM
cyst
syndrome
I
bronchial
atresia
abnormal lung
normal lung
Bronchopulmonary foregut malformations describe a range of congenital abnormalities
of the embryonic foregut, which represent an inverse spectrum of normal to abnormal
vasculature with normal to abnormal pulmonary parenchyma.
Congenital lobar hyperinflation (CLH), al lesion of abnormal lung development without an associated
vascular anomaly. Bronchial atresia is typically diagnosed later in life, and has been postulated to
represent previously undiagnosed CLH.
Bronchogenic cyst, typically incidental, solitary, unilocular and fluid-filled mass which lacks
communication to the airway. Air within a bronchogenic cyst therefore suggests infection or fistula.
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), previously called congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation.
Bronchopulmonary sequestration (BPS), aberrant lung tissue with anomalous systemic blood supply and
no connection to the bronchial tree.
Scimitar syndrome, a form of partial anomalous pulmonary venous return.
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM), an anomalous connection between the pulmonary
artery and pulmonary veins, is a purely vascular malformation without any abnormal lung development.
Peds: 1098