ADNEXAL TORSION
Adnexal torsion
Adnexal torsion results from twisting of the
ovarian vascular pedicle. This results in pain and
potential vascular compromise to the ovary.
Acute pain is usually localized to the affected
side. Pain may be episodic, especially if the
torsion is intermittent. Torsion occurs mainly in
reproductive-age women, and commonly occurs
in pregnancy. Torsion occurs more commonly on
the right side due to the position of the sigmoid Diagram demonstrates dual blood supply of the
colon, which inhibits free rotation of the left
ovary, with the yellow curved arrow representing
adnexa. Torsion may clinically mimic appendicitis. adnexal torsion.
The ovary may be predisposed to torsion by a lead-point adnexal mass, particularly if large,
most commonly an ovarian dermoid.
Because of the dual blood supply to the ovary (lateral from the ovarian vessels off the aorta,
and medial from the uterine vessels from the internal iliac), flow may still be detectable
by color Doppler, even with torsion. Intermittent ovarian torsion and detorsion may also
explain detectable color Doppler flow in these cases.
Classic ultrasound features of ovarian torsion in a patient with acute pelvic pain includes
an enlarged, edematous ovary with abnormal Doppler, and free fluid. Twisting ("swirling")
of the vascular pedicle (whirlpool sign) is very specific, but not often seen. Less specific but
most common features include:
Enlarged ovary >4 cm in diameter.
Unusual position of affected ovary, which may be even found on the contralateral side.
Follicles pushed to the periphery of the ovary.
Free fluid in the pelvis.
Variable Doppler findings: Lack of flow is not always seen and usually indicates necrosis or infarction.
Other Doppler findings include normal or intermittent flow, absent or reversed arterial diastolic flow on
spectral imaging.
MRI and CT features of ovarian torsion are similar to the ultrasound findings. The most
common (but nonspecific) finding is an enlarged ovary > 4 cm in diameter. The follicles may
be peripherally displaced due to central hemorrhage and edema. Twisting of the ovarian
pedicle is uncommonly seen, but is pathognomonic for torsion when identified.
Ovarian torsion:
Axial T2-weighted MRI demonstrates
an enlarged right ovary that is displaced
into the pouch of Douglas. Note the
edematous central stroma (yellow arrow)
and peripherally distributed small follicles
(red arrows). The heterogeneously T2
hyperintense lesion within the right ovary
may have been the lead-point. Note the
partially imaged, normalized left ovary (blue
arrow).
GU: 315