Fetal hydronephrosis overview (continued)
Below is the 2014 consensus on classification of prenatal urinary tract dilation (UTD
classification system):
Normal: APRPD <4 mm less than 28 weeks; <7 mm at or after 28 weeks.
Possibly abnormal: 41 to <7 mm less than 28 weeks; 71 to <10 mm at or after 28 weeks.
Abnormal**: >7 mm less than 28 weeks; 210 mm at or after 28 weeks.
**Any of the following is also considered abnormal, independent of the APRPD: peripheral calyceal
dilation, abnormal renal parenchymal thickness or appearance, dilated ureter, abnormal bladder,
oligohydramnios thought to be due to an urinary cause. These features should be assessed in every fetus.
Hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and a normal bladder may be due to distal ureteral
obstruction or reflux.
Distal ureteral obstruction from ectopic insertion of the ureter into the bladder is often associated with
the upper pole moiety of a duplicated collecting system. The most common ectopic insertion of an upper
pole moiety is inferior and medial to the normally inserting lower pole ureter.
A ureterocele is dilation of the intramural portion of the ureter, which balloons out into the bladder
and causes a functional obstruction at the ureterovesicular junction. Ureterocele is also associated with
ectopic insertion of the upper pole moiety of a duplicated system.
Although not a physical obstruction, severe vesicoureteral reflux may cause hydronephrosis and
hydroureter, but the bladder remains normal.
Bladder outlet obstruction leads to hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and a dilated bladder.
Posterior urethral valves are by fari the most common cause of bladder outlet obstruction.
Urethral atresia is a rare cause of bladder outlet obstruction.
Hydronephrosis can lead to cystic renal dysplasia (increased echogenicity and cortical
thinning), a sign of irreversible renal damage.
Posterior urethral valves
Pwr
Coronal ultrasound through the fetal abdomen (left image) demonstrates bilateral hydronephrosis. Transverse
ultrasound through the fetal pelvis (right image) shows dilated bladder (BL) and posterior urethra (PU) in a
keyhole morphology. There is associated severe oligohydramnios (not shown).
Posterior urethral valves are congenital obstructions of the posterior urethra due to a
membranous flap in male fetuses.
Ultrasound findings show severe dilation of the posterior urethra resulting in the keyhole
sign. The bladder is typically enlarged and thickened. Bilateral severe ydroureteronephrosis
and oligohydramnios are usually present.
Obstetrics: 362