ORBITS
OVERVIEW AND ANATOMY OF THE ORBITS
Bony orbits and foramina
supraorbital foramen
optic canal
frontal bone
ethmoid bone
sphenoid lesser wing
sphenoid greater wing
lacrimal bone
zygomatic bone
nasal bone
superior orbital fissure
nasal septum
inferior orbital fissure
palatine bone
infraorbital foramen
maxilla
The orbit is a conical cavity formed by 7 bones: frontal, ethmoid, palatine, lacrimal, maxilla,
zygomatic, and sphenoid.
The orbital roof is part of the anterior skull base.
The orbital floor is the roof of the maxillary sinus.
Medially, the orbit borders the ethmoid air cells (across the lamina papyracea). Laterally, the
orbit borders the temporal fossa (across the zygoma and greater wing of sphenoid).
The orbital apex is the region around three bony openings (optic canal, superior orbital
fissure, and inferior orbital fissure) and the annulus of Zinn (common tendinous ring).
The following structures pass through the optic canal:
Optic nerve.
Ophthalmic artery.
The following structures pass through the superior orbital fissure, which includes all of the
cranial nerves (CN) of the cavernous sinus except CN V:
CN III (oculomotor nerve) innervates the superior, medial, and inferior recti, and inferior oblique muscles.
CN IV (trochlear nerve) innervates the superior oblique muscle (mnemonic: SO,).
CN V, (ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve) provides sensory innervation to the upper face.
CN VI (abducens nerve) innervates the lateral rectus muscle (mnemonic: LRg).
Superior ophthalmic vein drains into the cavernous sinus.
Superior branch of inferior ophthalmic vein drains into the superior ophthalmic vein or cavernous sinus.
The following structures pass through the inferior orbital fissure, which includes several
branches of CN V, (maxillary division of trigeminal nerve) after it passes from the cavernous
sinus through foramen rotundum and divides in the pterygopalatine fossa:
Zygomatic nerve (from CN V,) provides sensory innervation to the skin of the lateral cheek and temple.
Infraorbital nerve (from CN V,) provides sensory innervation to skin of the inferior eyelid, medial cheek,
upper lip, and lateral nose.
Inferior branch of inferior ophthalmic vein drains into the pterygoid venous plexus.
Neuro Head & Neck: 767