Architectural distortion
Patient A: Architectural distortion is caused by a scar Patient B: Single slice from a mammographic
from prior excisional biopsy (circle).
tomogram shows architectural distortion (circle),
which was invasive ductal carcinoma on biopsy.
Architectural distortion describes lines radiating from a central point with no central mass
visible, producing tethering and indentation of the breast tissue.
Architectural distortion is suspicious for malignancy. The differential for architectural
distortion includes invasive malignancy, complex sclerosing esion/radial scar, post-biopsy
scar, and some forms of fibrocystic change such as sclerosing adenosis.
MAMMOGRAPHIC WORKUP AND PROBLEM SOLVING
Spot compression (with or without magnification)
Spot compression is compression of a focal region of the breast, which allows for better
compression and therefore better resolution. Spot compression is almost always the next
step in evaluating a focal suspicious mammographic abnormality.
Typically, for evaluation of calcifications, spot compression magnification is used. For
evaluation of a mass or asymmetry, magnification is usually not needed. Note that areas of
architectural distortion may actually appear less apparent on magnification views.
If an apparent asymmetry "presses out" with focal compression, then the apparent
abnormality more likely represents superimposition of normal pliable fibroglandular tissue.
Often ultrasound will also be performed to further assure absence of any corresponding
suspicious finding.
If the abnormality does not significantly change shape when compressed, then it is
suspicious and its margins could be further assessed on spot magnification views. Evaluation
with ultrasound would also be warranted.
A smaller compression device will allow more precise compression, with the downside of
potentially losing landmarks in the surrounding parenchyma.
Compared to full-field digital mammography, tomosynthesis has the advantage of improved
lesion detection and characterization by reducing the effect of overlapping breast tissue.
Tomosynthesis may decrease the need for additional diagnostic imaging such as spot
compression.
XCC (exaggerated cranio-caudal)
The lateral XCC (XCCL) pulls lateral breast tissue into the detector.
The medial XCC (XCCM) pulls medial breast tissue into the detector.
Breast: 393