Paradoxical herniation
Paradoxical brain herniation, also known as sunken/sinking skin flap syndrome, is a
complication of large craniectomy where intracranial pressure falls below atmospheric
pressure, resulting in concave deformity and progressive shift of the brain away from the
calvarial defect.
MRI IN NEURORADIOLOGY
As discussed in the physics chapter, inherent tissue signal characteristics depend on the
longitudinal recovery/relaxation (T1) and transverse relaxation (T2) times of the protons in
that tissue.
T1 shortening is hyperintense (bright) on T1-weighted images and T1 prolongation is hypointense (dark).
Conversely, T2 shortening is hypointense on T2-weighted images and T2 prolongation is hyperintense.
Spin-echo Tl-weighted imaging
Most brain lesions are hypointense on T1-weighted images due to pathologic prolongation
of the longitudinal recovery.
The presence of hyperintensity on T1-weighted images (caused by T1 shortening) can be an
important clue to specific substances:
Fat.
Melanin.
Proteinaceous material.
Minerals: gadolinium, copper, manganese, iron,
Methemoglobin.
and calcium (rarely; when dispersed, not in
bone).
Slow-flowing blood also appears hyperintense on T1-weighted spin-echo sequences, which
have a short TR. This time-of-flight effect is called "flow-related enhancement."
Spin-echo T2-weighted imaging
Most brain lesions are hyperintense on T2-weighted images due to water content or edema
causing T2 prolongation.
The presence of hypointensity on T2-weighted images (caused by T2 shortening) can be an
important clue to specific substances:
Most stages of blood deoxynemoglobin, intracellular methemoglobin, hemosiderin).
Calcification.
Fibrous tissue.
Highly cellular tumors with a high nucleus:cytoplasm ratio producing low lesional water content (for
instance, lymphoma and medulloblastoma).
Desiccated secretions in the paranasal sinuses.
Fast-moving blood also appears nypointense on T2-weighted spin-echo sequences, which
have a long TE. This time-of-flight effect is called a "flow-void."
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)
FLAIR refers to the addition of an inversion pulse that nulls fluid signal (based on water's T1
characteristics).
The T2-FLAIR sequence is the workhorse of neuroradiology. It is usually referred to simply as
"FLAIR" even though the technique can apply to T1-weighted images as well.
While CSF is dark on both T2-FLAIR and T1-weighted images, they can be distinguished by
looking at the relative signal intensities of the gray and white matter.
T1: Normal white matter is hyperintense duei to fatty myelinated white matter, with a short T1 time.
T2-FLAIR: White matter is darker than gray matter. T2-FLAIR will be referred to as FLAIR in this chapter.
Neuro Brain: 657