Osteochondral lesions of the knee
Acute osteochondral fracture (younger patient): There Subchondral insufficiency fracture (middle-aged to
is a displaced fracture of the lateral trochlea (arrow) older patient): There is irregular thickening of the
involving the articular cartilage, subchondral bone
subchondral bone plate (arrow) with exuberant
plate, and subchondral bone.
surrounding edema.
Avascular necrosis (any age, but can be younger patient if history of prolonged steroid use or sickle cell),
in a third patient: Coronal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression demonstrates linear fluid signal (yellow
arrow) undercutting the subchondral bone plate of the lateral femoral condyle, in keeping with an unstable
osteochondral lesion. There is surrounding heterogeneous marrow signal with prominent edema. Note the
serpiginous edema of the medial femoral condyle (red arrow) without abnormality of the subchondral bone
plate, in keeping with avascular necrosis. Arthroscopic image from the same patient demonstrates the probe
easily entering the unstable defect.
Osteochondra lesion, osteochondral defect, and osteochondra injury are interchangeable
generic terms (rather than specific diagnoses) used to describe a range of focal disorders
of the articular cartilage, subchondral bone plate, and subchondral bone. There are a wide
range of causes including osteochondritis dissecans, osteochondral fracture, subchondral
insufficiency fracture, and avascular necrosis. There can often be imaging overlap between
these entities, especially in advanced cases with development of an unstable fragment.
Iti is usually not necessary to grade the severity of the osteochondral lesion. However, it is
important to note if fluid or cystic change deep to the lesion is present, implying that the
lesion is unstable (meaning that the lesion can be displaced by an arthroscopist's probe).
Also, if the lesion is displaced this should also be described.
Osteochondritis dissecans is a developmental disorder of subchondral bone, resulting in
formation of an unstable subchondral bone fragment. It tends to occur in pediatrics and
adolescents.
Osteochondral fracture is a result of an acute or chronic repetitive trauma, causing injury to
the cartilage and subchondral bone.
MSK: 1028