Galactocele (continued)
Mammogram (left image) shows a circumscribed, oval mass containing both high density and fat. A fat-fluid
level (arrow) is specific for a galactocele. Ultrasound shows a complex cystic and solid mass (calipers).
On ultrasound, a galactocele may have a variable appearance. If ultrasound shows a
hypoechoic, heterogeneous or complex cystic mass and mammography does not confirm fat
to be present, aspiration or core biopsy is indicated. If aspiration is performed, the obtained
fluid would be milky.
Intramammary lymph node
Mammogram (left image) shows a circumscribed, reniform mass (arrow), highly suggestive of an
intramammary lymph node. Ultrasound (in a different patient) of an intramammary! lymph node shows an oval,
circumscribed mass with a central echogenic fatty hilum (arrow).
An intramammary lymph node is benign normal structure within the breast. The vast
majority of intramammary lymph nodes occur in the upper outer quadrant. An adjacent
vessel entering the fatty hilum can sometimes be seen, especially on tomographic imaging.
On mammography, an intramammary, lymph node should have a characteristic reniform
shape with a fatty hilum (a lucent notch in the middle). If the hilum is not visible, a full
workup should be performed including spot compression and/or ultrasound, particularly if
location is atypical for an intramammary node.
Typically, a normal intramammary lymph node with a fatty hilum can be diagnosed with
confidence on mammography, but ultrasound can be useful as a problem-solving tool.
Ultrasound will show a hypoechoic mass with central echogenicity that represents the fatty
hilum. Color Doppler imaging would show vessels coursing into the hilum.
Note that while normal intramammary lymph nodes are only sometimes seen within the
breast, there are almost always lymph nodes present in the axilla. If there is unilateral
axillary lymph node enlargement and/or abnormal morphology, concern should be raised
for psilateral breast cancer. Bilateral enlarged axillary ymph nodes are unlikely to be caused
by breast cancer and may be due to systemic inflammatory or neoplastic disease, such as
collagen vascular disease or lymphoma.
Breast: 414