In the thoracic and lumbar spine, each nerve root exits below its corresponding vertebral
body. For instance, the L4 nerve root exits below the L4 vertebral body at L4-L5.
In contrast, in the cervical spine, each root exits above its corresponding vertebral
body. For instance, the C7 nerve root exits above the C7 vertebral body at C6-C7.At the
cervicothoracic transition, the C8 nerve root exits below the C7 vertebral body and the T1
nerve root exits below the T1 vertebral body.
Annular fissure
An annular fissure is a linear hyperintense signal on T2-weighted
images in the annulus fibrosis of the intervertebral disc. This
imaging finding is thought to correlate with injury of the annulus
fibrosis and may be a cause of pain.
Annular fissure is the preferred term over annular tear, as this
process is thought to be degenerative in most cases, rather than
annular fissure
traumatic.
Secondary vertebral body changes - Modic changes
Degenerative changes in the spine are associated with vertebral body endplate and
subchondral marrow signal changes that were described and classified by Modic.
Modic type 1 changes are edema: Hyperintense on T2-weighted and STIR images and
hypointense on T1-weighted images. These changes may be associated with active back
pain.
Modic type 2 changes are fatty metaplasia: Hyperintense on both T2- and T1-weighted
images and hypointense on STIR. Modic 2 changes are less likely to be associated with active
symptoms.
Modic type 3 changes are fibrosis: Hypointense on all sequences. Their clinical significance
is unclear, but are chronic in timecourse.
POSTERIOR STRUCTURES: FACET JOINTS AND LIGAMENTUM FLAVUM
Facet arthropathy/facet hypertrophy
The intervertebral facet joints are synovial joints that can undergo the same degenerative
processes as larger synovial joints, including cartilage loss, osteophytosis, sclerosis, and
subchondral cystic change.
Degenerative changes of the facet joints (facet arthropathy) may contribute to neural
foraminal narrowing and spinal stenosis due to mass effect from osteophytes and reactive
ligamentum flavum thickening.
Facet effusions are associated with spinal instability (motion on flexion-extension films).
Reactive bone marrow changes or soft tissue edema can be seen in active/Symptomatic
facet arthropathy.
A: synovial cyst is a ganglion cyst associated with facet arthropathy.
Ligamentum flavum hickening/hypertrophy
The ligamentum flavum lines the lamina at the posterior aspect of the spinal canal.
Thickening of the ligamentum flavum can contribute to spinal canal stenosis.
Ligamentum flavum thickening is rarely seen in isolation and is usually reactive to subjacent
facet arthropathy.
Spine: 884