Causes of conductive hearing loss
Otospongiosis (otosclerosis)
Fenestral otospongiosis: Axial noncontrast CT
Retrofenestral otospongiosis: Axial noncontrast
through the right temporal bone demonstrates focal CT through the left temporal bone shows focal
demineralization in the bone anterior to the oval
demineralization of the cochlear capsule (yellow
window (yellow arrow) at the fissula ante fenestram arrow). There is also demineralization of the fissula
(red arrow).
ante fenestram (fenestral otospongiosis, red arrow).
Otospongiosis, otherwise known as otosclerosis, is a primary bone dysplasia of the otic
capsule characterized by replacement of normal endochondral bone by irregular spongy
bone. Otospongiosis occurs most commonly in young and middle-aged women and is
bilateral 85% of the time.
Patients present with predominantly conductive hearing loss earlier on, and a mixed
conductive and sensorineural hearing loss later in the disease process.
The two main types of otospongiosis are fenestral and retrofenestral types.
The fenestral type of otospongiosis is more common, occurs at the fissula ante fenestram (located
directly anterior to the oval window), and usually affects the oval window.
The retrofenestral (cochlear) type is thought to represent a more severe form with involvement of the
otic capsule separable from the oval window, typically involving the cochlear capsule, with possible
extension to the vestibule, semicircular canals, and IAC. Involvement of the cochlear promontory can
result in a red-tinged appearance on otologic examination, termed the Schwartze sign.
CT is the best imaging modality for evaluation of otospongiosis. In the earlier, vascular
phase, there is replacement of dense bone with demineralized bone, resulting in a less
dense appearance. In a later, less active phase, the bone becomes more dense and sclerotic.
The differential diagnosis of cochlear demineralization includes retrofenestral otospongiosis,
osteogenesis imperfecta in a child, fibrous dysplasia in a young adult, and Paget disease in
an older adult.
Round window occlusion
Round window occlusion can occur with inflammatory tissue, bone lesions, high-riding
jugular bulb, or congenital absence.
These abnormalities can result in conductive hearing loss by adding resistance to acoustic
energy entering the cochlea and requiring more energy to displace the basilar membrane.
Superior semicircular canal dehiscence
Al bony defect in the superior semicircular canal results in dispersion of sound energy along
the canal, creating a "third window" with less energy available to the cochlea. The resultant
drop in sound wave amplitude leads to conductive hearing loss. The abnormal movement of
the endolymph can lead to a variety of vestibular and cochlear symptoms referred to as the
"third window phenomenon."
Neuro Head & Neck: 824