Thyroid-associated orbitopathy
Thyroid orbitopathy! in a patient with Graves disease: Coronal (left image) and axial noncontrast CT through
the orbits shows bilateral exophthalmos, increased orbital fat, and enlargement of inferior and medial rectus
muscle bellies sparing thei tendons (Coca-Cola bottle. sign).
Thyroid-associated orbitopathy, also known as Graves ophthalmopathy/orbitopathy or
simply thyroid eye disease, is an autoimmune disorder of the orbital soft tissues in patients
with thyroid disease. Although usually associated with Graves disease (the most common
cause of hyperthyroidism), it can also occur in patients with euthyroid or hypothyroid
autoimmune thyroiditis.
The pathogenesis consists of inflammation involving the orbital muscles and fat,
overproduction of Blycosaminoglycans (mostly hyaluronic acid) by fibroblasts, and
adipogenesis.
Thyroid-associated orbitopathy is the most common cause of proptosis and extraocular
muscle enlargement. maging demonstrates proptosis with orbital fat expansion and mild
fat stranding early in the disease and, with extended disease activity, fusiform extraocular
muscle enlargement.
Thyroid orbitopathy tends to be bilateral and spares the muscle tendons. The longitudinal
appearance of an enlarged muscle belly but a narrow anterior tendon is known as the Coca-
Cola bottle sign of thyroid orbitopathy.
The inferior rectus muscle is most commonly affected first. The mnemonic I'M SLOW helps
remember the order of involvement of the extraocular muscles:
Inferior rectus - medial rectus - superior rectus - lateral rectus - obliques
Atypical features such as isolated lateral rectus involvement, anterior tendon enlargement,
or unilaterality should prompt consideration of an alternative diagnosis, such as idiopathic
orbital inflammation or neoplasm.
Severe muscle enlargement can crowd the orbital apex, resulting in dysthyroid optic
neuropathy that may require surgical decompression if not responsive to steroids.
Thyroid orbitopathy, fatty type: Coronal (left image)
and axial noncontrast CT through the orbits shows
bilateral exophthalmos and increased orbital fat.
The extraocular muscles do not appear abnormally
thickened.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD,
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Neuro Head & Neck: 773