SMALL BOWEL
SMALL BOWEL ANATOMY
The duodenum has 4 parts: superior (D1), descending (D2), horizontal/transverse (D3) and
ascending (D4).
Valvulae conniventes (also known as plicae circulares) are the circumferential small bowel
folds.
In contrast, colonic haustra are not circumferential.
The superior mesenteric artery (SMA) supplies both the jejunum and ileum while the
duodenum receives blood from branches of the celiac axis.
A common small bowel mesentery anchors the jejunum and ileum to the posterior
abdominal wall.
The jejunum features larger, closer together folds and larger villi compared to the ileum.
The Ligament of Treitz (suspensory muscle of the duodenum) is a thin muscle located at
the junction of duodenum and the jejunum and serves as the divider between the upper
and lower GI tract. This becomes clinically relevant when trying to localize the source of GI
bleeding. It is not directly visualized by imaging, but can be indirectly located at the distant
edge of the ascending (fourth) portion of the duodenum.
An upper GI bleed is defined as occurring proximal to the Ligament of Treitz.
A lower GI bleed occurs distally to the Ligament of Treitz.
SMALL BOWEL OBSTRUCTION (SBO)
Small bowel obstruction (SBO) is common and most often due to adhesions from prior
surgery or hernia. Neoplasm, stricture, and intussusception are less common causes.
Radiographic evaluation of small bowel obstruction
An abdominal radiograph is often the initial imaging evaluation for suspected obstruction.
Radiographic findings of SBO include small bowel distention >3 cm. Multiple air-fluid levels
at different heights may be seen on the upright view. In addition, the lack of gas in the colon
is especially suggestive of obstruction.
Differential diagnosis of dilated loops of small bowel on plain radiographs include:
Post-operative adynamic ileus (recent history of surgery, will often see gas in the colon).
Focal ileus related to inflammatory process (pancreatitis, enteritis, bowel dilatation may be focal near the
location of inflammation).
lleus due to ascites: Ascites often compresses the ascending and descending colon and rectum as these
structures are not on a mesentery. However, gas in the transverse colon and sigmoid colon is still apparent.
Small bowel may be medialized.
A potential pitfall may be in a patient with a total colectomy or a bowel diversion where no
gas will be seen in the colon and the small bowel caliber may be greater than normal by
necessity.
GI: 197