Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM; continued)
The asymmetric septal hypertrophy variant, known as idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic
stenosis (IHSS), may cause left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. Diagnostic criteria
include an end-diastolic wall thickness of 215 mm and a ratio of 21.5 compared to the lateral
wall. A wall thickness x30 mm is an indication for ICD placement.
The apical HCM variant is more commonly seen in Asians and has the classic imaging
appearance of a spade-shaped" left ventricle.
Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve is an associated
finding that can cause mitral regurgitation and resultant left atrial enlargement.
Although diagnosis is usually made by echocardiography, indications for MRI are to confirm
the diagnosis of HCM, to measure the left ventricular mass, and to quantify the degree of
subvalvular stenosis.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Impaired diastolic filling: Contrast-
enhanced CT demonstrates dilation and
reflux of contrast into the IVC and hepatic
veins (arrow), indicative of impaired right
ventricular filling and resultant dilation of
the right atrium, IVC, and hepatic veins.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD,University of Virginia Health System.Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by small, stiff, thickened ventricles that impair
diastolic filling. This results in dilated atria and ultimately a dilated IVC. The etiology of the
restrictive cardiomyopathy may be idiopathic or due to sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis,
hypereosinophilic syndrome (e.g., Loeffler's endocarditis), or myocardial deposition diseases
(e.g., amyloidosis).
Note that restrictive cardiomyopathy and constrictive physiology are different entities,
although both conditions may feature identical ventricular pressure tracings and both are
characterized by impaired diastolic filling.
Constrictive physiology subsequently discussed under pericardial disease) is secondary to
increased pericardial pressure from thickened (often calcified) pericardium or pericardial
effusion, causing impaired diastolic filling.
The main role of imaging the heart in impaired diastolic filling is to exclude constrictive
pericarditis as the etiology of the diastolic dysfunction. Constrictive pericarditis can be
treated surgically by removing the pericardium; however, there is no effective treatment for
restrictive cardiomyopathy and patients tend to have a poor prognosis.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by diffuse cardiac chamber enlargement
with impaired systolic function. Typically, both ventricles are involved.
DCM can be ischemic or nonischemic in etiology. It is the most common nonischemic
cardiomyopathy, often idiopathic, with other causes including alcohol abuse, myocarditis, or
drug toxicity. Evaluation by MRI or CT is useful to determine the etiology.
Cardiac: 527