VASCULAR DISEASE OF THE TESTIS
Testicular torsion
Testicular torsion is twisting of the testicle around the spermatic cord and the vascular
pedicle. Torsion presents with acute scrotal pain and is a surgical emergency.
Torsion may lead to irreversible testicular infarction if not de-torsed within a few hours.
De-torsion within 61 hours has an excellent prognosis.
De-torsion after 24 hours has a poor prognosis for testicular salvage.
Transverse grayscale ultrasound (left image) shows slight enlargement of the left testis relative to the right.
There is an absence of arterial or venous flow within the left testis on color Doppler (right image), consistent
with testicular torsion.
The bell-clapper deformity predisposes to torsion due to a small testicular bare area. The
bare area is the testicular attachment site and normally prevents the testicle from rotation.
Ultrasound findings of torsion are dependent on the time elapsed since torsion:
Hyperacute (within a few hours): Ultrasound shows a hyperechoic and shadowing torsion knot of twisted
epididymis and spermatic cord, with no blood flow in the affected testicle.
Acute (between a few hours and 24 hours): Affected testicle is enlarged and heterogeneous.
Missed torsion (>24 hours): Affected testicle is enlarged and mottled, with scrotal skin thickening and
increased flow in the scrotal wall. A complex or septated hydrocele may be present.
Segmental infarction
Segmental infarction is a focal testicular infarction which can be due to microvascular
thrombosis from acute inflammation, vasculitis, or sickle cell disease.
Patients are typically in their thirties and present with acute pain which may mimic
epididymitis or torsion clinically.
The typical appearance of infarction is a wedge-shaped hypoechoic area with no flow on
Doppler.
The primary differential consideration of infarction is a hypovascular tumor. Infarcted tissue
may undergo necrosis, making differentiation from tumor even more difficult. MRI may be
helpful to distinguish infarction from tumor in ambiguous cases to potentially spare the
patient from unnecessary orchiectomy.
GU: 286