GASTROESOPHAGEAL VARICES AND PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNTS
Ballon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO)
Ballon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO) is used for the management of
gastric variceal bleeding due to portal hypertension and is more commonly performed in
Asia. In the United States and Europe, BRTO is usually performed when endoscopic therapy
fails and TIPS is not an option.
In the United States and Europe, TIPS is the first-line treatment for gastric variceal hemorrhage. By
decompressing portal hypertension, TIPS induces hemostasis of gastric varices and reduces the risk of
rebleeding, but may cause liver failure and hepatic encephalopathy as described previously.
BRTO involves endovascular obliteration of gastric varices by injection of a sclerosing agent
directly into the varix via a gastrorenal or gastrocaval shunt while the variceal blood outflow
is occluded by an inflated balloon.
In patients without spontaneous gastrorenal or gastrocaval shunt, BRTO is not at treatment option.
By obstructing a major gastrorenal shunt, BRTO increases portal venous pressure, therefore
improving liver function, lowering the risk of liver failure and hepatic encaphalopathy.
However, it can worsen ascites and esophageal varices if present.
BRTO has comparable efficacy to TIPS in treating refractory gastric variceal hemorrhage. In
fact, it is associated with lower rates of rebleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, and mortality.
Overview of the procedure:
Percutaneous access is achieved through the femoral vein (most common) or jugular vein.
Then, catheterization of the gastrorenal shunt via the left renal vein is performed.
Balloon occlusion of the gastrorenal shunt outflow is done followed by a shunt venogram to map the
anatomy.
Sclerosant is injected upstream intoi the varices. Occlusive balloon is left in place for 4-24 hours until
sclerosant has reached stasis.
Variations to BRTO have been developed with shorter procedural time and occlusion of the
shunt by either coiling or vascular plugging.
Common complications include gross hematuria, aggravation of esophageal varices, ascites,
hydrothorax/pleural effusion, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and portal vein thrombosis.
ONCOLOGIC INTERVENTIONS
ABLATION THERAPY
Percutaneous tumor ablation is a safe alternative to surgical resection in carefully selected
patients. The role of ablation is actively evolving and expanding. Ablation is commonly
performed in the liver, kidney, lung, and bone, and its role in other sites (e.g., prostate,
thyroid) is also expanding. Common indications include local control of solitary or
oligometastatic disease (1-5 metastatic lesions) and/or pain palliation. The best outcomes
for local control are obtained for lesions that are <5 cm in maximal diameter, but indications
for debulking and palliation of larger lesions are increasing. The most common techniques
for percutaneous ablation include cryoablation, microwave ablation, and radiofrequency
ablation. Other techniques include irreversible electroporation, laser, and ethanol ablation.
Heat sink phenomenon is a limitation of all thermal ablation techniques, where adjacent
blood vessels prevent large temperature variations, resulting in cooler temperatures of the
surrounding tissue and the potential for residual unablated tissue.
IR: 636