Di/di dichorioni/diomniont, twins
Di/di twins each have a separate placenta and amniotic sac.
On ultrasound, two placentas can usually be separately identified in the second trimester.
The inter-twin membrane will be relatively thick as there are two layers of chorion and two
layers of amnion separating each twin.
In the second and third trimesters, the thickness of the inter-twin membrane is less reliable
to determine chorionicity because the membrane becomes thinner as gestation progresses.
The twin peak sign (also called lambda sign) represents a triangle-shaped placental infolding
at the interface of the placenta and the thick inter-twin membrane that is seen in di/di
twins. The twin peak sign is most useful when it is difficult to distinguish two placentas.
If the twins are different sexes, they must be dizygotic twins, which are always di/di.
Grayscale ultrasound demonstrates
the twin peak or lambda sign (arrow)
seen with dichorionic/liamniotic twins,
where the inter-twin membrane is
twin 2
thickened at the placental junction
and tapers to a point, resulting in a
triangular morphology.
twin 1
Mono/di momocthonomi/diemmatg twins
Mono/di twins share a placenta, but have separate amniotic sacs.
The shared placenta is usually apparent on ultrasound in the second trimester.
The inter-twin membrane is thin, as it is composed of only two layers of amnion. This
membrane meets the placenta in a T-shape configuration.
Grayscale ultrasound of monochorionic/
diamniotic twins shows a thin inter-
twin membrane (yellow arrows) which
inserts on the placenta in a T-shape
configuration (red arrow).
Mono/mono monsdetismi/memsmaaig twins
Mono/mono twins share both a placenta and a single amniotic sac with no intervening
membrane between the twins. Intertwined cords are diagnostic of mono/mono placentation
when seen.
Isolated lack of visualization of an inter-twin membrane is not sufficient to diagnose mono/
mono twins. If no inter-twin membrane (or intertwining cord) is seen, then the amnionicity
cannot be determined. Because mono/mono twins are SO rare, it is more common to have
mono/di twins with non-visualization of the inter-twin membrane.
Obstetrics: 335