Hereditary papillary RCC (HPRCC)
HPRCC is an autosomal dominant syndrome that presents with multiple, bilateral papillary
RCCS. It is associated with mutations in the MET gene.
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and RCC (HLRCC)
HLRCC is an autosomal hereditary syndrome characterized by the development of multiple
RCCS, uterine and cutaneous leiomyomas, and adrenal hyperplasia. The most commonly
seen renal cancer subtype is papillary RCC.
Sickle cell trait
Sickle cell is associated with medullary renal carcinoma.
Comparison of syndromes with renal masses
Hereditary
von Hippel-Lindau Birt-Hogg-Dubé
Tuberous sclerosis
RCC
HLRCC
Sickle cell trait
papillary
Clear cell RCCs
Chromophobe RCCS Slightly increased Papillary RCCS Multiple renal Medullary RCCS
Renal cysts
Oncocytomas
risk of RCC
cancer subtypes,
Bilateral AMLS
papillary most
common
Renal cysts
IMAGING OF RENAL TRANSPLANT
Approach to renal transplant
The transplanted kidney is implanted in the right > left iliac fossa. It is easily evaluated by
ultrasound due to its superficial location. Usually, a single kidney is transplanted, but
en-bloc transplant of both kidneys into the recipient can be occasionally performed
(i.e., pediatric donor kidneys to an adult recipient).
The goal of ultrasound evaluation after renal transplant is to determine whether there is a
treatable surgical or vascular complication. Ultrasound cannot reliably differentiate between
the various causes of parenchymal rejection, but it is useful to guide percutaneous biopsy
for definite diagnosis.
An elevated RI (>0.7) suggests renal dysfunction, but this finding is nonspecific.
Surgical complications following renal transplant
Coronal contrast-enhanced CT shows
a transplant kidney in the left lower
quadrant (yellow arrow) and native
bilateral polycystic kidneys. There is
a loculated fluid collection inferior
to the transplant kidney which
tracks into a left inguinal hernia (red
arrows). Differential for this collection
includes a seroma, urinoma, or
lymphocele.
GU: 267