Meconium ileus
Meconium ileus: Neonatal abdominal radiograph (left image) shows a low/distal small bowel obstruction, with
a dilated stomach and numerous dilated loops of bowel extending to the pelvis. Contrast enema (right image)
shows a very small caliber colon (microcolon; red arrows), with numerous rounded filling defects in the distal
ileum (yellow arrows), representing inspissated meconium.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD and Carlo Buonomo, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Meconium ileus causes bowel obstruction from inspissated meconium in the distal ileum
and colon. It can be complicated by perforation and resultant meconium peritonitis,
which can cause abdominal and/or scrotal calcifications. The abdominal calcifications are
frequently trapped between the liver and diaphragm, which is not seen in other causes of
diffuse abdominal calcifications.
Meconium ileus is the earliest manifestation of cystic fibrosis: almost 100% of babies
with meconium ileus have cystic fibrosis, while "10% of babies with cystic fibrosis have
meconium ileus.
The classic radiographic appearance of meconium ileus is a distal obstruction (multiple loops
of dilated bowel), with soap-bubble lucencies in the right lower quadrant in the region of
the distal ileum.
Contrast enema shows a microcolon (meconium ileus has the smallest of all microcolons)
with a distended ileum containing multiple rounded filling defects representing inspissated
meconium.
Meconium ileus is both diagnosed and treated with therapeutic water-soluble gastrografin
enema, which functions to loosen the inspissated meconium. It often takes multiple
attempts to fully clean out the meconium, and carefully increasing the contrast osmolality
may be helpful. Uncommonly, resistant cases may need to be treated surgically.
lleal atresia / colonic atresia
Atresia of the ileum or colon features a microcolon distal to the atretic segment.
Colonic atresia is rare.
Unlike meconium ileus, ileal and colonic atresia demonstrate an abrupt cutoff at the site of
atresia, and there are no filling defects within the bowel.
Peds: 1133