NUCLEAR IMAGING FOR CARDIAC INFLAMMATION AND INFECTION
Cardiac sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis a systemic disease of noncaseating granulomas with cardiac manifestations of
arrhythmias, left ventricular dysfunction, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. Cardiac findings
are usually seen in conjunction with other manifestations of sarcoidosis, including lung
disease and adenopathy.
F-18 FDG PET is a noninvasive method for diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis and monitoring
treatment response.
Prior to imaging, patient is first placed on a high-fat low-carbohydrate diet for 24 hours
prior, then undergoes fasting for at least 12 hours, in order to suppress physiologic glucose
metabolism by the myocardium, SO that FDG uptake by inflamed myocardium can be
detected.
Cardiac sarcoidosis typically presents as focal or patchy FDG uptake in the myocardium.
Pitfalls in FDG PET include diffuse myocardial uptake due to incompletely suppressed
physiologic uptake, and uptake in the lateral LV wall which can be a normal variant.
Mismatch pattern of perfusion defect with focal FDG uptake can represent hibernating
myocardium and coronary artery disease, therefore needs to be excluded by CT or invasive
angiography or stress perfusion imaging prior to interpretation of the images as focal
myocardial inflammation.
F-18 FDG PET and perfusion imaging can be combined to identify sarcoid-induced tissue
damage. Perfusion defect correlating to a focal FDG uptake suggests myocardial fibrosis/
scarring due to advanced sarcoidosis. Perfusion imaging is normal in early stage of disease.
Cardiac and systemic sarcoidosis:
Coronal MIP image of F-18 FDG PET shows increased
myocardial uptake in the left ventricle, and increased
uptake associated with multiple mediastinal and
bilateral hilar lymph nodes.
FDG PET was obtained with a special diet preparation
that included 24 hours of high-fat low-carbohydrate
diet prior to injection of 10 mCi of F-18 FDG.
SA (mid)
SA (base)
HLA
VLA
Rest
FDG
Tc-99m sestamibi myocardial perfusion images (top row) and F-18 FDG PET images (bottom row) of the
same patient as above. Regions of hypoperfused myocardium (inferior wall and the basal septum, arrows)
demonstrate mismatch on FDG PET consistent with active myocardial inflammation (since obstructive
coronary artery disease was excluded by coronary angiography).
Cardiac: 498