CYANOTIC: INCREASED PULMONARY VASCULARITY (ADMIXTURE "T" LESIONS)
Transposition of the great arteries (TGA)
Transposition of the great arteries:
Ao
Antenatal ultrasound at an oblique plane
through the great vessels demonstrates
PA
the aorta (Ao) is anterior to the pulmonary
artery (PA), as the aorta arises from the
right ventricle (the most anterior cardiac
chamber).
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD,
Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is the most common cause of cyanotic heart
disease in newborns. In TGA, there is improper pairing of the ventricles and great vessels
ventriculoarterial discordance): the morphologic right ventricle pumps blood to the aorta
and the morphologic left ventricle pumps blood to the pulmonary arteries.
Two main subtypes of TGA exist:
Dextro (D)-TGA features ventriculoarterial discordance with atrioventricular concordance (correctly paired
atria and ventricles). Isolated D-TGA without flow admixture (ASD, VSD or PDA) is incompatible with life
("D = death").
Levo (L)-TGA features a "congenitally corrected TGA" with atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial (double)
discordance. L-TGA is compatible with life ("L = life").
Pre-natal ultrasound diagnosis of TGA requires evaluation of the short- or long-axis of the
great vessels. TGA is usually inapparent on a 4-chamber view. Sonographic diagnosis shows
the aorta anterior the heart and the great vessels exiting the heart in parallel (rather than
crossing in the normal fashion).
The classic radiographic egg-on-a-string appearance (D-TGA) is actually uncommonly seen.
It represents a narrow mediastinal waist (caused by the parallel course of the aorta and PA
and thymic involution secondary to stress). A more typical appearance is a slightly narrow
superior mediastinum, lack of main pulmonary artery bulge and increased pulmonary
vasculature; however, the radiographic picture varies depending on the nature of the
coexisting shunt. A right aortic arch is seen in 5%.
Surgical treatment for D-TGA is the arterial switch (Jatene) procedure, which swaps the
aorta and pulmonary artery, and relocates the coronary arteries to the neo-aorta.
Tricuspid atresia
Tricuspid atresia is absence or dysplasia of the tricuspid valve resulting in no flow between
the right atrium and right ventricle. It may have a variable radiographic appearance
depending on the size of the associated VSD.
Small VSD: Normal-sized heart, with decreased pulmonary vasculature.
Large VSD: Enlarged heart with increased pulmonary flow.
Peds: 1115