Tuberculoma
A tuberculoma is a localized tuberculosis granuloma. It is not always possible to differentiate
a tuberculoma from a pyogenic abscess.
A tuberculoma tends to have central nypointensity on T2-weighted image (in contrast to
a pyogenic abscess, which is hyperintense). A cystic tuberculoma, however, may mimic
a pyogenic abscess. Similar to pyogenic abscess, tuberculomas tend to show restricted
diffusion.
Lyme disease
Lyme disease, caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, can cause white matter disease
with a nonspecific imaging appearance of T2 prolongation predominantly in the frontal
subcortical white matter. Associated enhancement of multiple cranial nerves or meningeal
enhancement may suggest the diagnosis.
VIRAL INFECTION
Herpes encephalitis
Axial FLAIR
DWI
SWI
Herpes encephalitis: MRI images show abnormal FLAIR hyperintensity and restricted diffusion in the anterior
right temporal lobe with regional mass effect and associated foci of susceptibility representing petechial
hemorrhagic conversion (arrow).
Herpes encephalitis is a devastating (if untreated), necrotizing encephalitis caused by
reactivation of latent HSV-1 within the trigeminal ganglion.
Clinical symptoms are nonspecific, with fever and headache often being prominent
complaints. Mental status may be altered.
Herpes should be the first consideration in any patient with fever, mesial temporal lobe
signal abnormality, and acute altered mental status.
Although lumbar puncture should be obtained before MRI and treatment should never be
delayed for MRI, it is important to note that herpes encephalitis may be present when not
clinically suspected and PCR of HSV in cerebrospinal fluid is not 100% sensitive.
Herpes encephalitis causes edema, hemorrhage, and necrosis, typically in the medial
temporal lobes and the inferior frontal lobes.
CT is often normal but can show ill-defined hypoattenuation in the affected regions.
MRI is much more sensitive and typically shows bilateral (but usually asymmetric) T2
prolongation in the medial temporal lobe, insular cortex, cingulate gyrus, and inferior frontal
lobe.
Neuro Brain: 746