Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR; continued)
Two nuclear studies are often used for the evaluation and follow-up of reflux:
Radionuclide cystogram (RNC) involves the instillation of approximately 1 mCi of Tc-99m pertechnetate
into the bladder through a catheter. RNC is the most sensitive test to evaluate for reflux. RNC is often used
for follow-up of reflux once the anatomy is established by' VCUG. RNC grading is three-stage:
RNC grade 1: Ureteral reflux only (VCUG I).
RNC grade 2: Reflux reaches renal calyces (VCUG II-III).
RNC grade 3: Ureteral dilation (VCUG IV-V).
Tc-99m-DMSA renal scintigraphy (DMSA scan) is the gold standard for detection of renal cortical scarring,
seen as areas of relative photopenia.
Duplex collecting system
Two patients with duplicated collecting systems: Intravenous pyelogram (left image) shows a duplicated right
collecting system, with mild blunting of the upper pole calyces (yellow arrow).
In a different patient, coronal (top right image) and axial contrast-enhanced pyelographic phase CT shows
severe hydronephrosis of the obstructed right upper pole (red arrow). The dilated, unopacified upper pole
ureter (blue arrow) courses medially to the opacified, normal-caliber lower pole ureter (green arrow).
A duplex collecting system contains two separate pelvicalyceal systems and two ureters. A
duplex system may be of no clinical significance if the ureters fuse. However, if the ureters
insert separately into the bladder, there is an increased risk of obstruction (in the upper pole
moiety) and reflux (in the lower pole moiety), as described by the Weigert-Meyer rule.
The Weigert-Meyer rule: In a duplicated system, the upper pole ureter inserts ectopically
(inferomedially) into the bladder and is prone to obstruction, often due to a ureterocele. The
lower pole ureter inserts orthotopically (normally) on the bladder but is prone to reflux.
obstructed superior moiety
duplicated kidney
inferior moiety inferiorly displaced
by obstructed superior moiety
normal kidney and
collecting system
lower pole ureteri inserts orthotopically (normally),
buti is prone to reflux
upper pole ureter inserts ectopically,
inferior and medial to the lower pole ureter.
ureterocele causing obstruction
Peds: 1146