Myelolipoma
Adrenal myelolipoma: Axial (left image) and coronal (right image) CT shows a predominantly fatty mass with a
few circumscribed foci of soft-tissue attenuation in the left adrenal (arrows). The mass is clearly distinct from
the kidney, as best seen on the coronal image.
Case courtesy Chery!. Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's 's Hospital.
An adrenal myelolipoma is a benign neoplasm consisting of myeloid cells (i.e., erythrocyte
precursors = not "myo" as in muscle) and fat cells. In rare cases, they can be extra-adrenal
and are pathologically indistinguishable from extramedullary nematopoiesis, which occurs in
patients with hematologic disorders.
An adrenal mass with macroscopic (gross) fat is virtually diagnostic of a myelolipoma. It is
usually an incidental finding and can be large (>4 cm) at the time of diagnosis. There are
few reports of adrenocortical carcinoma and metastatic carcinoma with macroscopic fat,
but these cases are very rare. A retroperitoneal liposarcoma may mimic a myelolipoma,
although liposarcoma typically presents as a large mass that may displace, rather than arise
from, the adrenal.
An adrenal myelolipoma should not be confused with a renal angiomyolipoma (AML). These
two entities are unrelated, although they do have similar names, are located in adjacent
organs, and are both diagnosed by the presence of macroscopic fat.
Adrenal cyst
Adrenal cysts are relatively uncommon but have typical imaging characteristics of benign
cysts that occur elsewhere in the body: internal fluid content with thin, smooth, non-
enhancing wall).
Endothelial adrenal cysts are the most common (45%) type and may be ymphatic or
angiomatous in origin.
Pseudocysts secondary to adrenal hemorrhage represent 39% of adrenal cysts and lack an
epithelial lining. Peripheral calcification may be present.
Epithelial cysts are rare, comprising only 9% of adrenal cysts.
Occasionally an adrenal cyst may have a complex appearance and can be difficult to
differentiate from a cystic/necrotic neoplasm. In such a case, percutaneous aspiration or
surgical resection may be considered.
Small, asymptomatic, simple cysts can be ignored. A cyst may rarely grow SO large as to
cause symptoms, such as dull pain or compression of the stomach/duodenum, but these
cases are very uncommon.
Very rarely, hydatid disease may affect the adrenal glands, typically producing a complex
cystic lesion with an internal membrane.
GU: 237