Pineal parenchymal tumors (continued)
Higher grade tumors are associated with ill-defined margins (invading adjacent structures),
more restricted diffusion owing to high cellularity, and a propensity for CSF seeding.
Germ cell tumors "engulf" by inducing calcification of the pineal gland, whereas pineal
parenchymal tumors lexplode" by peripherally displacing existing physiologic pineal
calcifications.
Pineal cyst
Pineal cysts are seen commonly on MRI and have a prevalence as high as 40% on autopsy
series. They are more common in women.
Most pineal cysts are less than 1 cm and asymptomatic, but may cause symptoms due to
mass effect. Very few pineal cysts grow and follow-up of small pineal cysts is not routinely
recommended.
Pineal cysts are usually not entirely simple. Most of them do not fully suppress on FLAIR.
Rim calcification can be seen about 25% of the time.
Contrast is necessary when evaluating a pineal cyst, as the primary differential diagnosis is a
pineal parenchymal tumor. Pineal cysts may show thin, smooth peripheral enhancement but
not thick, irregular, or nodular enhancement.
Gliomas
Gliomas (most commonly astrocytomas) may occur in intra-axial structures around the
pineal region, such as the tectum of the midbrain, thalamus, or splenium of the corpus
callosum.
Metastases
Metastasis to the pineal gland is rare.
Leptomeningeal disease is present in 2/3 of patients with pineal metastasis.
Meningioma
The tentorial apex, adjacent to the pineal gland, is a rare location for meningioma.
A tentorial meningioma tends to depress the internal cerebral veins, unlike tumors of pineal
gland origin, which tend to lift the internal cerebral veins.
Quadrigeminal plate lipoma
Quadrigeminal plate lipoma: Axial (left image) and sagittal (right image) T1-weighted MRI shows a lobulated,
hyperintense mass of the quadrigeminal plate. Note the associated thinning of the posterior body (arrow) and
splenium of the corpus callosum.
A lipoma of the quadrigeminal plate (another name for the tectum) is a rare lesion that may
be seen in isolation or in association with agenesis or hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.
The quadrigeminal plate is another name for the tectum.
Neuro Brain: 730