Buerger disease
As previously discussed in the "Vascular" chapter, Buerger disease is a small- and medium-
vessel vasculitis that typically occurs in male smokers. It more commonly involves the legs
but may also involve the hands, presenting with ischemia, ulcerations, and even gangrene.
Small vessel occlusions and prominent corkscrew collaterals are typical features.
Raynaud disease
Raynaud disease is small arterial vasospasm triggered by cold temperature.
On imaging, there is decreased perfusion of the distal digital arteries, with improvement
upon warming or vasodilator administration.
Raynaud disease is associated with scleroderma and other connective tissue disorders.
LOWER EXTREMITY VASCULAR ANATOMY
SiTA
B
C
D
Lower extremity three vessel runoff angiogram. A) Yellow arrow - CFA, blue arrow - profunda femoris, green arrow = SFA; B) green
arrow - SFA, blue arrow - descending geniculate artery; C) green arrow -1 tibioperoneal trunk, blue arrow - ATA, yellow arrow = PTA,
red arrow - peroneal artery. Note the small calf AVM supplied by a small posterior tibial branch and a distal branch of the superior
medial geniculate artery. D) Blue arrow - dorsalis pedis, yellow arrow = PTA, green arrow = deep plantar arch.
The lower extremity vascular tree begins when the external iliac artery continues into the
common femoral artery (CFA) at the level of the inguinal ligament. The CFA branches into
the profunda femoris posteriorly and the superficial femoral artery (SFA). The profunda
femoris artery supplies the medial and posterior thigh as well as the proximal femur with
the medial and lateral femoral circumflex artery branches.
The SFA continues in the adductor canal of the anterior compartment of the thigh, dives
into the adductor hiatus and enters the posterior compartment of the thigh as the popliteal
artery. After the popliteal artery courses past the inferior border of the popliteus muscle, it
branches into the anterior tibial artery (ATA) and the tibioperoneal trunk.
The ATA passes through the interosseous membrane and courses within the anterior
compartment of the leg. It continues to the dorsum of the foot as the dorsalis pedis artery.
The tibioperoneal trunk divides into the peroneal artery, which supplies the lateral
compartment of the leg, and posterior tibial artery which courses along the deep posterior
leg muscles, enters the tarsal tunnel with the tibial nerve, and divides into the medial and
lateral plantar arteries.
IR: 618