CENTRAL SKULL BASE AND SELLA
OVERVIEW AND ANATOMY OF THE SELLAR AND PARASELLAR REGIONS
Sellar and parasellar region
The sella turcica is a saddle-shaped depression of the sphenoid bone, which creates the
space for the pituitary gland.
The anterior wall of the pituitary fossa is the tuberculum sellae. The posterior wall is the
dorsum sellae. The roof is the diaphragma sellae, a dural reflection.
The parasellar region includes the cavernous sinuses, suprasellar cistern, and hypothalamus.
Pituitary gland
The pituitary is composed of an anterior and a posterior lobe.
The anterior pituitary adenohypophysis) produces and secretes the following hormones:
growth hormone (GH), prolactin, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone
(LH), adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). The
anterior pituitary gland is formed from Rathke pouch, which is a superior invagination of
primitive oral ectoderm.
Rathke pouch normally involutes. Sometimes, a cleft can be left behind, which may give rise to
craniopharyngioma or Rathke cleft cyst.
The posterior pituitary neurohypophysis) and infundibulum (pituitary stalk) are the
projection from the hypothalamus that transports and secretes antidiuretic hormone (ADH),
vasopressin) and oxytocin. The posterior pituitary gland is formed from neuroectoderm.
The normal posterior pituitary is hyperintense on T1-weighted MRI due to stored ADH and is called the
posterior pituitary bright spot, best seen on sagittal images. Loss of the posterior pituitary bright spot has
been associated with central diabetes insipidus but also occurs in some normal patients.
The posterior pituitary normally descends from the diencephalon. Sometimes, the downward extension is
halted, resulting in an ectopic posterior pituitary, usually at the median eminence (inferior aspect of the
hypothalamus).
The combination of ectopic posterior pituitary with an absent or hypoplastic infundibulum and anterior
pituitary is known as pituitary stalk interruption (transection) syndrome.
Normal posterior pituitary bright spot (arrow) Sagittal T1-weighted MRI shows absence of the normal
on sagittal T1-weighted MRI.
posterior pituitary bright spot and an intrinsically T1
hyperintense nodule within the infundibulum (arrow),
likely an ectopic posterior pituitary.
The pituitary gland enhances on dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in accordance with
its blood supply: first the infundibulum and posterior pituitary, followed by the anterior
pituitary, which is supplied by the hypophyseal portal system. The entire gland enhances
homogeneously between 30-60 seconds and then washes out.
Neuro Head & Neck: 795