ATRAUMATIC FRACTURES
Atraumatic fractures are bone injury caused by a mechanism other than a single traumatic
episode. Atraumatic fractures may be due to underlying abnormal bone (as in insufficiency
fracture, atypical fracture, or pathologic fracture), or the bone may be normal (as seen in
fatigue fracture).
Fragility fractures are traumatic fractures in an elderly patient with osteoporosis (and often
sarcopenia), caused by a ow-velocity mechanism that would not normally be expected to
cause fracture in a patient with normal bone mineral density or muscle mass.
TERMINOLOGY OF ATRAUMATIC FRACTURES
Stress fracture: Terminology
Atraumatic fractures
Stress fracture
Fatigue fracture
Insufficiency fracture
Atypical fracture
Pathologic fracture
By strict definition, the term stress fracture encompasses both fatigue fractures and
insufficiency fractures. These are fractures due to summation of repetitive forces, which
overwhelm the bone remodeling pathway.
A fatigue fracture is injury of a normal bone caused by repetitive submaximal force, often described with
the maxim "abnormal stress on normal bone."
An insufficiency fracture is injury of an abnormal bone, weakened through a metabolic process (most
commonly but not necessary osteoporosis). In other words, "normal stress on abnormal bone."
The above terminology is often confusing. Clinically, the term stress fracture is usually
considered synonymous with fatigue fracture. Also, there is substantial clinical and imaging
overlap between fatigue and insufficiency fractures, and there is no clear cutoff between
"normal" and "abnormal" stress or "normal" and "abnormal" bones. For these reasons, the
term fatigue fracture is not commonly used. This text will use stress fracture and fatigue
fracture synonymously to be consistent with the majority of the literature. However, the
term insufficiency, fracture is usually reserved for older individuals.
The term bone stress injury refers to the spectrum of injury seen in stress fractures. This
is subsequently discussed and may range from periosteal reaction in early stages, bone
marrow edema in mid-grade injuries, to cortical fracture in more advanced stages.
An atypical fracture is a special type of insufficiency fracture, only occurring in the lateral
cortex of the proximal-to-mid femur, subsequently discussed.
Pathologic fracture: Definition
A pathologic fracture is a fracture through a focal lesion. The lesion is most commonly
a neoplasm (may be benign or malignant), or less commonly through a region of
osteomyelitis.
MSK: 992