PHAKOMATOSES
Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) / von Recklinghausen disease
Axial T2-weighted axial MRI through the cerebellum
Coronal T2-weighted MRI of the lumbar
demonstrates T2 hyperintense "unidentified bright objects"
spine shows the characteristic target
of neurofibromatosis representing myelin vacuolization
appearance of plexiform neurofibromas (red
(yellow arrows).
arrows), which are T2 hyperintense with
central hypointensity.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), also known as von Recklinghausen disease, is a
multisystemic neurocutaneous disorder with prominent skin manifestation (e.g., café au lait
spots), peripheral nerve sheath tumors (e.g., plexiform neurofibroma), CNS malignancies
(e.g., optic nerve glioma), and bony abnormalities (e.g., sphenoid wing dysplasia).
NF1 is autosomal dominant in 50% of cases and occurs sporadically in 50%, caused by a
defect in chromosome 17.
In children, "bright spots" or "unidentified bright objects" are almost universally seen on T2-
weighted images, thought to be caused by myelin vacuolization. These bright spots are seen
most commonly in children aged 4-12 and become less prominent in adults.
Neurofibromas are WHO grade I nerve sheath tumors. The cutaneous and subcutaneous
nerves are more commonly involved than the more proximal peripheral nerves. A plexiform
subtype is more aggressive and consists of a network of fusiform-shaped masses, with
malignant degeneration reported in approximately 5%.
Like schwannomas, neurofibromas are likely of Schwann cell origin.
The target. sign can be seen with either neurofibromas or schwannomas, and reflects central T2
hypointensity thought to be due to a fibrocollagenous core. The target. sign is suggestive of benignity.
In contrast to schwannomas, neurofibromas are not encapsulated and involve the entire cross-sectional
area of the nerve. Ifa neurofibroma is resected, the parent nerve must therefore be sacrificed.
NF1 is associated with multiple brain neoplasms:
Optic nerve glioma (50% of these tumors are associated with NF1).
Juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma.
Brainstem glioma.
Peds: 1191