Absence of the cavum septum pellucidum (CSP)
The cavum septum pellucidum (CSP) should always be identified in a normal fetus.
If the CSP is not seen, the primary consideration is agenesis of the corpus callosum, as the
cavum septum pellucidum and corpus callosum are formed simultaneously.
Uncommonly, the CSP may be absent in the presence of a normal corpus callosum. This may
represent septo-optic dysplasia and fetal MRI should be recommended.
Hydranencephaly
Hydranencephaly is complete cortical destruction due to infarct or infection. The brain
parenchyma is obliterated and replaced by fluid. In most instances, this finding follows a
previously normal fetal survey.
The most common cause of nydranencephaly is in utero complete occlusion of both internal
carotid arteries.
In contrast to severe hydrocephalus, a cortical mantle is absent in hydranencephaly.
In contrast to holoprosencephaly, a falx is typically visualized in hydranencephaly because it
is supplied by the external carotid artery.
Choroid plexus cyst
Transverse ultrasound of a fetal head shows
a hypoechoic cyst (arrow) located within the
echogenic, otherwise normal-appearing choroid.
Cysts within the choroid plexus are common. The vast majority of choroid plexus cysts are
present in normal fetuses and resolve on follow-up scans. However, choroid plexus cysts are
a hallmark of trisomy 18.
Choroid plexus cysts can be considered an incidental finding in the absence of any other
sonographic abnormality and with a normal maternal serum screen.
A choroid plexus cyst appears on ultrasound as a discrete and round hypoechoic to anechoic
lesion within the choroid plexus that is visible in two planes, and measures >3 mm in size.
A potential mimicker of a choroid plexus cyst is the spongy choroid, which describes a
heterogeneous echogenic choroid that is a normal variant.
Vein of Galen malformation
Color Doppler ultrasound of the fetal head shows an
enlarged midline vascular structure representing a
vein of Galen malformation.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD, Diagnostic
Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Obstetrics: 351