MESENTERIC VASCULOPATHY AND ANEURYSMS
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)
Polyarteritis nodosa:
Selective digital substraction
angiogram of the superior
mesenteric artery shows
numerous tiny peripheral
aneurysms (arrows).
Case courtesy Dmitry Rabkin,
MD, Brigham and Women's
Hospital.
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis of small- and medium-sized
arteries that causes multiple small visceral aneurysms. P-ANCA is usually elevated.
PAN typically affects renal, hepatic, and mesenteric end-arterioles.
PAN is associated with several medical conditions remembered with the mnemonic CLASH
cryoglobulinemia, leukemia, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren syndrome, and hepatitis B).
Treatment of PAN is with steroids, not procedures.
The differential diagnosis of multiple renal artery aneurysms includes multiple septic emboli,
speed kidney (due to chronic methamphetamine abuse), and Ehlers-Danlos.
The ideal imaging modality is invasive angiography given the size of the multiple
microaneurysms. However, recent advances in CTA allow to visualize these small aneurysms
in the vessels.
Regular CT or MRI images can demonstrate focal regions of infarcts in the solid organs.
Splenic artery aneurysm
Splenic artery aneurysm is the most common
visceral aneurysm. Multiparous females and
patients with portal hypertension are at
increased risk of developing splenic artery
aneurysms. Splenic artery aneurysms have an
increased risk of rupture during pregnancy.
A: splenic artery pseudoaneurysm may be the
result of trauma or pancreatitis.
Indications for treatment of a splenic artery
aneurysm include presence of symptoms (such
as left upper quadrant pain), aneurysm size >2
cm, and prior to expected pregnancy.
Endovascular coil embolization is the preferred
approach. Coils are first placed distal to the
aneurysm neck (to exclude retrograde collateral 3D volumetric reconstruction of a CT angiogram
flow), then placed proximally.
demonstrates a splenic artery aneurysm (arrow).
Vascular: 565