Semi-invasive (chronic necrotizing) aspergillosis
Semi-invasive aspergillosis is a necrotizing granulomatous inflammation (analogous in
pathology to reactivation TB) in response to chronic aspergillus infection. Semi-invasive
aspergillosis is seen in debilitated, diabetic, alcoholic, and COPD patients.
Clinical symptoms include cough, chronic fever, and less commonly hemoptysis.
On CT, there are segmental areas of consolidation, often with cavitation and pleural
thickening, which progress slowly over months or years.
Airway-invasive aspergillosis
Airway-invasive aspergillosis is aspergillus infection deep to the airway epithelial cells. It is
seen only in the mmunocompromses, including neutropenic and AIDS patients.
The spectrum of clinical disease ranges from bronchiolitis to bronchopneumonia.
The main CT findings of airway-invasive aspergillosis are centrilobular and tree-in-
bud nodules. When bronchopneumonia is present, radiograph and CT findings are
indistinguishable from other causes of pronchopneumonia, such as Staph. aureus.
Angioinvasive aspergillosis
Angioinvasive aspergillosis is an aggressive infection characterized by invasion and occlusion
of arterioles and smaller pulmonary arteries by fungal hyphae. Angioinvasive aspergillosis is
seen almost exclusively in neutropenic patients.
The CT halo sign represents a halo of ground glass attenuation surrounding a consolidation.
The ground glass corresponds to hemorrhage.
Halo sign: CT shows a left upper lobe mass
with peripheral ground glass (yellow arrow),
representing pulmonary hemorrhage.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD,
University of Virginia Health System.
The halo sign is not specific to angioinvasive aspergillosis, and can also be seen in viral infection,
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), Kaposi sarcoma, hemorrhagic metastasis, and others.
The air crescent sign represents a crescent of air from retraction of infarcted lung and occurs
with recovery of neutrophil counts. It a good prognostic sign as it indicates that the patient
is in the recovery phase.
Air crescent sign: Noncontrast CT shows a
lesion in the left lower lobe with a crescent-
shaped air collection anteriorly (arrows).
Chest: 31