Arterial variants
Arterial anatomic variants are among the causes of a red retrotympanic mass and of
pulsatile tinnitus.
The most common of these is the aberrant internal carotid artery, which is an enlarged
collateral pathway between the internal and external carotid artery trees involving the
caroticotympanic artery and the inferior tympanic artery. CT shows a dehiscent carotid
plate, soft tissue protruding into the anterior mesotympanum and coursing down over the
cochlear promontory to the posterior mesotympanum, and an enlarged inferior tympanic
canaliculus.
Axial (left image) and coronal noncontrast CT through the left temporal bone demonstrates an aberrant
carotid artery which extends laterally into the middle ear cavity with dehiscent bony covering, and
coursing around the cochlear promontory (arrows). The ipsilateral foramen spinosum is not visualized (not
shown), suggesting the presence of a persistent stapedial artery.
In a lateralized internal carotid artery, the petrous segment of the internal carotid
artery protrudes laterally, with a thinned or dehiscent carotid plate, into the anterior
mesotympanum. The inferior tympanic canaliculus is not involved.
A persistent stapedial artery is a branch of the hyoid artery connecting the external and
internal carotid arteries, which normally regresses. CT shows soft tissue coursing from the
petrous segment of the internal carotid artery, up over the cochlear promontory, and along
the proximal tympanic segment of the facial nerve. The foramen spinosum is absent.
Venous variants
Venous variants of the sigmoid sinus and jugular bulb are among the causes of pulsatile
tinnitus and, in the case of dehiscent jugular bulb, of a blue retrotympanic mass.
Sigmoid sinus or jugular bulb dehiscence refers to a gap in the bony plates that separates
the venous structure from the mastoid air cells or middle ear, respectively.
Sigmoid sinus or jugular bulb diverticulum refers to a focal outpouching of the vessel that
protrudes into the temporal bone, with or without bony dehiscence.
High-riding jugular bulb describes when the dome of the jugular bulb rises to a higher than
normal position (which is inconsistently defined), with or without bony dehiscence. Hearing
or balance issues may result from encroachment on middle and inner ear structures.
Neuro Head & Neck: 814