Holoprosencephaly
Holoprosencephaly is failure of midline cleavage of the primitive prosencephalon in early
embryologic development. The most severe form, alobar holoprosencephaly, leads to fused
thalami and a single monoventricle that may communicate with a large dorsal cyst. Brain
tissue surrounds the monoventricle, forming a characteristic boomerang shape.
Holoprosencephaly is associated with trisomy 13, facial hypoplasias, and midline facial
anomalies including clefts, ypotelorism/cyciops, absent nose and proboscis.
Oblique axial/coronal ultrasound through
the posterior brain shows fused thalami
across the midline (arrows). A large dorsal
cyst is present, largely replacing the
visualized supratentorial brain. No falx is
seen.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD,
Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC)
Normal corpus callosum forms by 20 weeks gestational age from the body to the splenium.
The rostrum forms last.
Absence of the corpus callosum (ACC) can be a difficult diagnosis to make prenatally.
Because the normal corpus callosum is not always visualized on ultrasound, it is often
necessary to rely on secondary abnormal morphology of the ventricular system to diagnose
absence of the corpus callosum.
Absence of the cavum septum pellucidum is associated with ACC.
Abnormal teardrop morphology of the lateral ventricles with dilated occipital horns, known as
colpocephaly, is associated with ACC. Colpocephaly is often seen together with ventriculomegaly.
Widely separated ventricular frontal horns and parallel configuration of the lateral ventricles both
suggest ACC. This is sometimes referred as the. steer horn or Viking helmet configuration.
A midline interhemispheric cyst may be present, representing superior herniation of the third ventricle.
A minority of fetuses with agenesis of the corpus callosum have trisomy 8, 13, or 18.
Transverse ultrasound through the fetal
head shows ventriculomegaly and a
colpocephalic configuration of the lateral
ventricle with a dilated teardrop-shaped
occipital horn (calipers). The ventricle is
oriented parallel to the falx.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD,
Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Obstetrics: 350