Overview of implant rupture (continued)
Rupture of an implant can be contained within the fibrous capsule (intracapsular rupture) or
may extend out of the fibrous capsule extracapsular rupture).
The distinction between intra- and extracapsular rupture is only important for silicone
implants. The contents of a saline implant will leak out even if the fibrous capsule remains
intact.
Intracapsular silicone implant rupture
Intracapsular rupture of a silicone implant may manifest clinically as a subtle change in
the implant contour but without significant change in the size or even shape of the breast.
Rupture of a silicone implant can be challenging to diagnose clinically.
Mammography is often normal, and ultrasound or MRI is usually necessary to diagnose
silicone implant rupture.
MRI of intracapsular silicone implant rupture can have several appearances:
Linguine sign is the most classic and describes the presence of multiple curvilinear lines representing the
fragmented and collapsed elastomer shell that is floating within thei intracapsular silicone.
Subcapsular line sign describes a thin layer of silicone interposed between the implant shell and fibrous
capsule.
Keyhole and teardrop signs describe focal invagination of the implant shell due to leaked silicone outside
the shell.
Radial folds are normal infoldings of the implant shell that can mimic implant rupture.
Ultrasound of intracapsular silicone implant rupture may show segments of broken and
collapsed implant shell floating within intracapsular silicone at various levels, termed the
stepladder sign.
Left: Axial T2-weighted MRI of the left breast without fat saturation shows the curvilinear undulating
contour of the disrupted and collapsed silicone implant shell (arrow), representing the linguine sign.
Right: Ultrasound shows a stepladder pattern of the echogenic silicone implant shell (arrows). The implant
envelope is floating within a lake of fluid containing low-level internal echoes, representing silicone.
Breast: 433