Scimitar syndrome (continued)
Scimitar syndrome represents partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) from
right lower lobe pulmonary veins into either the right atrium or IVC.
In contrast to PAPVR, in total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), all 4 pulmonary veins return
blood to the right atrium, and an obligate right-to-left: shunt is necessary for survival.
The anomalous vein appears like a "scimitar" or Turkish sword on the frontal radiograph,
representing the scimitar sign.
Scimitar syndrome can be associated with hypoplasia and hyperlucency of the right lung
(although this finding is not demonstrated in the case above).
SMALL AIRWAYS DISEASE
Bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis: Frontal and lateral chest radiographs demonstrate bilateral hyperexpanded lungs with increased
perihilar markings and peribronchial cuffing.
Bronchiolitis is an infection of the lower respiratory tract, most commonly caused by
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). It is mostly seen in children under the age of 5 years and is
the leading cause of infant hospitalization in the United States.
Inflammation of bronchiolar epithelium leads to peribronchial infiltration by inflammatory
cells. The resultant necrotic debris may lead to small airway obstruction, the hallmark of
bronchiolitis.
Clinically, bronchiolitis presents as increased work of breathing and wheezing in a child,
usually with a viral upper respiratory prodrome. It is primarily a clinical diagnosis.
Radiographic findings include hyperexpanded lungs (best seen as flattening of the
diaphragms on the lateral view) with scattered areas of atelectasis, increased perihilar
peribronchial markings and peribronchial cuffing. These findings are subjective, with high
variability among even experienced pediatric radiologists.
Similar radiographic findings in an older patient population may represent reactive airways disease.
It is important to exclude bacterial pneumonia which features focal airspace consolidation with air
bronchograms and pleural effusions.
Round pneumonia, most often caused by S. pneumoniae and seen in children less than 8 years of age, is
typically seen as a round pulmonary opacity with well-defined margins mimicking a mass.
Peds: 1102