Orbital fractures (continued)
A trapdoor fracture is a special type of orbital floor blowout that usually occurs in children
where the inferiorly displaced fracture fragment recoils and entraps herniated orbital
soft tissue, which can cause restricted motility or necrosis of the inferior rectus muscle.
Entrapment is a clinical diagnosis.
Large orbital blowouts (e.g., >2 cm2 defect area or >1.5 mL outward herniated volume)
predict the development of noticeable enophthalmos after the acute swelling subsides.
Naso-orbito-ethmoid fractures
Naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fractures involve the upper central midface, classically along 5
key edges: from the pyriform aperture across the lateral nasal wall, inferior orbital rim and
floor, medial orbital wall, frontomaxillary suture, and nasomaxillary suture.
NOE fractures are classified by the morphology of the central fragment where the medial
canthal tendon inserts:
Type :: noncomminuted large central fragment.
Type I: comminuted central fragment not disrupting area of medial canthal tendon insertion.
Type II: comminuted central fragment disrupting area of medial canthal tendon insertion.
Displaced NOE fractures can cause telecanthus (increased distance between the medial
corners of the eyes) and obstruction of nasolacrimal and frontal sinus drainage pathways.
Nasoseptal fractures
Nasal fractures are the most common facial fractures. Isolated nasal fractures should be
distinguished from more serious naso-orbito-ethmoid fractures.
Most commonly, ateral-oblique forces fracture the bony nasal pyramid (nasal bones and/or
frontal processes of the maxillae). Frontal forces additionally involve the anterior nasal spine
and/or cartilaginous or bony nasal septum.
Associated septal hematoma can cause necrosis of the cartilage and subsequent saddle nose
deformity.
Le Fort fractures
Le Fortl
Le Fortll
Le Fort III
Fracture involves lateral margin
Pyramidal fracture, involves
Fractures involve the
of the pyriform (nasal) aperture
thei inferior orbital rim, along
zygomatic arch, along with
with the orbital floor and
the lateral and medial orbital
Allows free movement of the
medial orbital wall.
walls.
hard palate (floating palate).
Allows free movement of the
Allows free movement of the
nose and hard palate (floating
entire midface (craniofacial
maxilla).
dissociation).
Neuro Head & Neck: 786