MALE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM
MALE URETHRAL ANATOMY
posterior urethra
prostatic urethra
site OfTURP
urinary bladder
membranous urethra
anterior urethra
bulbous urethra
site ofgonococcalsticture
penile urethra
penoscrotal
site ofpost-catheter: stricture
junction ejaculatory duct
prostatic urethra
posterior urethra:
prostate -
site OfTURP and
urethra
-
prostatic
posterior urethral valves
membranous urethra
verumontanum
membranous urethra
bulbous urethra
anterior urethra:
site ofg gonococcal. stricture
bulbous urethra
penile urethra
penile urethra
site ofiatrogenic stricture from catheterization (at the penoscrotal) junction)
fossa navicularis
Prostatic urethra posterior urethra)
The prostatic urethra is lined with transitional epithelium.
The verumontanum is a prominent ridge of smooth muscle in the posterior portion of the
prostatic urethra and the site of the paired ejaculatory duct orifices. The verumontanum is
also the site of obstruction in posterior urethral valves in children. The prostatic utricle is a
Mullerian duct derivative and is the blind-ending male homologue of the uterus and vagina,
which is also located at the verumontanum.
Membranous urethra posterior urethra)
The membranous urethra is the shortest, least mobile urethral segment.
The membranous urethra is contained within the urogenital diaphragm, which contains the
external urethral sphincter and the paired Cowper's glands.
Bulbous urethra (anterior urethra)
The bulbar urethra is the site of drainage of Cowper's (or bulbourethral) glands.
Penile urethra (anterior urethra)
The penile urethra is the longest urethral segment, lined with squamous epithelium.
The distal portion of the penile urethra is dilated at the glans penis. This dilation is called the
fossa navicularis.
The glands of Littré are small mucous glands of the penile urethra. Normally, small ducts
would be occluded by balloon during a retrograde urethrogram, and therefore would not
opacify with injected contrast. The glands of Littré tend to opacify more prominently when
inflamed in the setting of urethritis.
GU: 276