Medulloblastoma (continued)
Medulloblastoma is slightly hyperattenuating on CT due to its densely packed cells and
is accordingly hypointense on T2-weighted images and has low ADC values. The tumor
enhances, except for possibly group 4 tumors, and may appear heterogeneous due to
internal hemorrhage and calcification.
The low ADC values can be a useful finding to differentiate medulloblastoma from ependymoma and
pilocytic astrocytoma, the two other most common childhood posterior fossa tumors.
Leptomeningeal metastatic disease is present in up to 1/3 of patients and medulloblastoma
is the most common cause of drop metastases to the spine in children. In this setting,
sugar-coating (Zuckerguss) refers to the icing-like enhancement over the brain and
spinal cord surface. Imaging of the entire brain and spine should be performed prior to
surgery. Since medulloblastomas are hypercellular, DWI is particularly helpful in detecting
leptomeningeal disease.
When medulloblastoma occurs in a young adult (as opposed to a child), the tumor tends to
arise eccentrically in the posterior fossa, from the cerebellar hemisphere.
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT)
Atypical teratoid/thabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is an uncommon WHO grade 4 embryonal tumor
characterized molecularly by loss of SMARCB1/INI1 or SMARCA4/BRG1 expression.
AT/RT appears similar to medulloblastoma but is less common and occurs in slightly younger
patients. It should be considered as part of the differential for a large brain tumor in children
younger than three years of age.
The majority occur in the cerebellum. Unlike medulloblastoma, however, about a third of
cases of AT/RT are supratentorial.
For al large heterogeneous supratentorial mass in an infant/young child, the differential diagnosis includes
AT/RT and, less commonly, what was previously known as primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) and is
now mostly classified as either (1) embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes (ETMR), C19MC-altered; or
(2) CNS embryonal tumor, not otherwise specified.
A third of patients with AT/RT have germline mutations in SMARCB1 or SMARCA4, resulting
in rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome, which is also associated with malignant
rhabdoid tumor of the kidney.
Dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma (hermitte-Duclos)
Dysplastic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum, more often known as Lhermitte-Duclos disease,
is a WHO grade 1 neuronal lesion that has been considered a hamartoma by some and
neoplasm by others.
Adult-onset Lhermitte-Duclos disease is often associated with Cowden syndrome
(multiple hamartoma syndrome associated with benign mucocutaneous lesions like facial
trichilemmomas as well as breast and thyroid cancer), a part of the PTEN hamartoma tumor
syndrome.
The characteristic imaging finding is a corduroy or tiger-striped appearance of thickened
folia in the cerebellar hemisphere. The lesion is hyperintense on T2-weighted images and
enhancement is rare.
Neuro Brain: 719