Hepatic encephalopathy
Axial noncontrast T1-weighted MRI shows intrinsic
T1 hyperintensity in bilateral globi pallidi (arrows) in
a patient with chronic liver disease.
Chronic hepatic encephalopathy is a reversible clinical syndrome seen in patients with
chronic liver disease, frequently with portal hypertension or portosystemic shunting.
Clinical presentation can vary from subtle cognitive impairment to more acute presentations
of cognitive dysfunction during acute decompensation.
The characteristic imaging finding is symmetric hyperintensity on T1-weighted imaging of
the globi pallidi and substantia nigrae, thought to be due to manganese accumulation.
Acute hepatic encephalopathy or hyperammonemic encephalopathy is primarily caused by
hyperammonemia, and is seen in acute liver failure.
Characteristic imaging features of hyperammonemic encephalopathy include restricted
diffusion accompanied by FLAIR hyperintensity symmetrically and bilaterally involving the
insular and cingulate gyri, with relative sparing of the occipital lobes and perirolandic region.
Recurrent alterations in ammonia levels, occurring in frequent acute on chronic liver failure
presentations, can also result in chronic accumulation of glutamine, which may manifest as
elevated Blutamine-glutamate peak on MR spectroscopy.
Uremic encephalopathy
Uremic encephalopathy occurs in acute and chronic renal failure as a result of excessive
uremic toxins.
Clinically patients present with neurologic symptoms, such as movement disorders, impaired
mental status, cognitive disorders, and seizures.
The most common imaging pattern is bilateral symmetric involvement of the basal ganglia
with variable involvement of the white matter.
The lentiform fork sign can be seen in patients with concurrent metabolic acidosis,
characterized by FLAIR hyperintensity involving the white matter surrounding the lentiform
nuclei, outlining the lateral and medial boundaries of the putamina.
Hypoglycemic encephalopathy
The most common imaging finding is symmetric FLAIR hyperintensity with associated
restricted diffusion affecting the gray matter in the parieto-occipital and temporal regions,
with relative sparing of the thalami, white matter and cerebellum. Basal ganglia involvement
can be seen and is associated with a poor prognosis.
Neuro Brain: 739