FEMOROACETABULAR IMPINGEMENT (FAI)
Overview and controversy of femoroacetabular impingement (FAI)
Femoroacetabular impingement
normal
cam-type FAI
(FAI) is abnormal abutment of
the femur with the acetabulum at
extremes of range of motion.
Two types of impingement have
been described, depending if the
femoral head/neck junction (cam-
type) or the acetabulum (pincer-
type) is abnormal.
Chronic microtrauma of the
femoral head abutting against the
acetabulum may cause acetabular
pincer-type FAI
mixed-type FAI
labral tears in young athletic
individuals and may accelerate the
development of hip osteoarthritis.
While FAI may be an important
cause of hip osteoarthritis in young
patients, there is controversy
as to whether a diagnosis of
impingement can be made based
on the imaging findings in the
absence of the clinical syndrome.
Impingement is primarily a clinical diagnosis and there is a significant subset of patients
with abnormal morphology of the acetabulum or femoral head/neck junction who are
asymptomatic.
Labral injury secondary to FAI (typically occurring in the anterosuperior labrum) is often
associated with underlying chondral injury as well.
Regardless of the controversy, FAI is an important concept to be aware of in the young adult.
A general consensus is that imaging findings suggestive of FAI should be described with the
disclaimer that these findings may predispose to impingement in the presence of pain.
Cam-type impingement
Cam-type impingement, characterized
by an osseous convexity of the femoral
head/neck junction, is most common
in young athletic males.
The alpha angle defines the degree
of femoral bump. An alpha angle is
measured on oblique axial MRI or
CT. An alpha angle of >55 degrees
is said to be abnormal, especially if
symptoms of hip impingement are
present. Of note, there is a relatively
high prevalence of asymptomatic
Frontal radiograph demonstrates an osseous convexity at the
femoral head/neck junction (arrow), which can be consistent
individuals with elevated alpha angles. with a CAM lesion in a patient with the clinical syndrome of
hipi impingement.
MSK: 1042