Ankylosing spondylitis
Three patients with ankylosing spondylitis:
Romanus and shiny corner lesions: Lateral radiograph of the upper lumbar spine (left image) shows an erosion
of the anterior superior margin of a vertebral body at the discovertebral, junction, representing a Romanus
lesion (yellow arrow). The superiorly adjacent vertebral body demonstrates sclerosis of its anterior inferior
margin, representing the shiny corner sign (red arrow). The shiny corner sign signifies evolution of a prior
Romanus lesion.
Bamboo spine: Frontal radiograph of the sacroiliac joints and lumbar spine (middle image) demonstrates
symmetrical sacroiliac joint ankylosis (yellow arrows). There are diffuse syndesmophytes, creating an
undulating contour of the spinal column, representing the bamboo spine (red arrows). There is fusion of the
spinous processes, creating the dagger sign (blue arrow).
Cervical fusion: Lateral radiograph of the cervical spine (right image) shows complete ankylosis of cervical
spine with fusion of the vertebral bodies and facet joints and a pseudarthrosis at C2-C3 (green arrow).
Cases courtesy Stacy Smith, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is predominantly seen in young men with HLA-B27 and presents
with back pain and stiffness. AS can be associated with pulmonary fibrosis (upper lobe
predominant), aortitis, and cardiac conduction defects.
The earliest radiographic signs of AS are symmetric erosions, widening, and sclerosis of the
sacroiliac joints.
Subsequently, the spine invariably becomes involved, with radiographic findings following a
specific sequence, which ascend from the lumbar to the cervical spine.
Romanus lesions are erosions of the anterior superior or inferior edges of the vertebral body endplates
caused by enthesitis (inflammation at a ligament or tendon insertion site) at attachment of the annulus
fibrosus to the vertebral body.
Shiny corners represent sclerosis of prior Romanus lesions at the corners of the vertebral bodies.
Squaring of the vertebral body disc margins develops due to erosions and bone loss.
Delicate syndesmophytes represent bony bridging connecting adjacent vertebral margins, which create
the classic bamboo spine (spinal ankylosis) in late-stage disease.
In advanced disease, the fully ankylosed spine is at a very high risk of fracture with even
minor trauma. CT is necessary for evaluation of even minimal trauma in a patient with
advanced AS and pain after trauma.
An Andersson lesion is a pseudarthrosis occurring in a completely ankylosed spine.
MSK: 919