ELBOW MRI
Medial (ulnar) collateral ligament tear
Medial (ulnar) collateral ligament partial tear:
Coronal T1-weighted MRI with fat suppression
from an arthrogram with injection of dilute
gadolinlum-containing contrast demonstrates
subtle undersurface stripping (yellow arrow) of the
attachment of the MCL onto the sublime tubercle
of the ulna. This appearance is known as the T-sign
(a sideways T).
The humeral origin of the MCL (red arrow) is
intact.
The medial collateral ligament (MCL) of the elbow, also known as the ulnar collateral
ligament (UCL), is the ligamentous stabilizer against valgus stress. Valgus stress is a force
directed against the lateral elbow, putting tensile stress on the medial side.
MCL tears are due to valgus stress. In distinction to the knee, when the valgus stress is
typically a single traumatic event (for instance, in the knee, a force on the lateral knee), in
the elbow MCL injuries are usually the result of chronic stress from the late cocking phase of
throwing. On radiography, valgus stress ("Telos") views can bring out widening of the medial
joint space.
Illustration demonstrates the mechanism
of how valgus stress causes MCL tearing.
Force on the lateral elbow (large red
arrows; such as in the late cocking phase
of throwing) causes tensile force on the
MCL, ultimately leading to failure.
In this diagram, the mid-substance of
the MCL is torn. More commonly seen is
tears of the humeral attachment or ulnar
attachment (as in the case above).
Frontal radiograph
Frontal radiograph with valgus stress applied
MCL deficiency: Frontal and valgus-stress radiographs of the elbow (different patient as the MRI
case above) show relative widening of the medial compartment (arrows) with valgus-applied stress,
indicating MCL deficiency. Note partially imaged valgus stress device (red arrow).
Tears of the MCL may involve the humeral attachment, the ulnar attachment onto the
sublime tubercle, or may be mid-substance. A common pattern injury is undersurface
stripping of the sublime tubercle attachment, creating the T-sign as shown in the MRI case
above. Surgical treatment is the Tommy-John surgery, which is highly effective.
MSK: 1068