Crohn's disease (continued)
Perirectal abscess and enterocutaneous fistula secondary to Crohn's disease: Contrast-enhanced CT (left
image) shows a peripherally enhancing fluid collection to the right of the rectum (yellow arrows).
T2-weighted MRI (right image) shows the distal portion of an enterocutaneous fistula extending to the skin
surface (red arrow). There is marked subcutaneous edema (blue arrows) extending into the subcutaneous
tissues of the right buttock.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Celiac disease (sprue, gluten-sensitive enteropathy)
Celiac disease, also known as sprue and gluten-sensitive enteropathy, is an autoimmune,
proximal enteritis caused by a T-cell-mediated immune response triggered by antigens in
ingested gluten.
The primary sites of involvement are the duodenum and jejunum.
The most characteristic imaging finding of celiac disease is reversal of jejunal and ileal
fold patterns. Normally, the jejunum has more and closer together folds compared to the
ileum. However, in celiac disease, the loss of jejunal folds due to villous atrophy causes a
compensatory increase in the number of ileal folds.
Fluoroscopy small bowel follow-through may show flocculations of barium due to lack of
contrast adhesion to the bowel wall due to villous atrophy. The moulage (French for casting)
refers to a cast-like appearance of the featureless jejunum.
The CT findings of celiac disease include dilated, fluid-filled bowel loops, often with intra-
luminal flocculations of enteric contrast. Reversal of jejunal and ileal fold patterns may be
seen. Contrast can be seen both insinuated between the small bowel folds and centrally
within the bowel, with a peripheral layer of low-attenuation secretions. Other CT findings of
celiac disease include mesenteric adenopathy and engorgement of mesenteric vessels.
Unlike with other causes of enteritis, diffuse bowel wall thickening and ascites are less
common.
An important complication of celiac disease is small bowel T-cell lymphoma, which
may manifest as an exophytic mass, circumferential bowel wall thickening, or enlarged
mesenteric lymph nodes.
GI: 207