Optic nerve sheath meningioma
Optic nerve-sheath meningioma: Axial
post-contrast fat-sat T1-weighted image
demonstrates marked enhancement
surrounding the left optic nerve with a
tram-track appearance (arrows).
Meningiomas are the most common tumors arising from the optic nerve sheath.
Optic nerve meningiomas usually occur in adults with a female predilection and rarely in
children unless associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2).
Patients present with slowly progressive visual impairment, classically with preservation of
the central visual field (peripheral constriction).
On imaging, the nerve sheath appears circumterentialy thickened, with uniform contrast
enhancement and often calcifications. The enhancing tumor surrounding the nonenhancing
optic nerve produces the tram-track sign on axial images and doughnut sign on coronal
images.
Cavernous venous malformation
Venous malformations, previously known as cavernous hemangiomas, are encapsulated
slow-flow vascular malformations that are the most common orbital mass in adults.
Orbital venous malformations can be located anywhere but are usually intraconal.
MRI shows a well-defined mass that is isointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense
on T2-weighted images, demonstrating patchy enhancement that slowly fills in.
Orbital venous varix
Orbital varices are distended veins freely
connected to the normal circulation, arising
primarily as congenital malformations but
sometimes secondary to arteriovenous
malformations or fistulae.
Orbital varices represent the most common
cause of spontaneous orbital hemorrhage
but patients usually present with intermittent
positional/stress: proptosis.
Orbital varices appear as ovoid or tubular,
intensely enhancing structures, often
intraconal but not always.
Varices can be distinguished from other
vascular lesions in that they demonstrate
dynamic distension with maneuvers that
Delay-phase axial CT angiogram shows bilateral
orbital varices.
increase venous pressure such as the Valsalva
maneuver or prone positioning. Doppler
ultrasound demonstrates slow flow.
Neuro Head & Neck: 779