ORBITAL AND OCULAR INFECTION
Overview of orbital infection
The most common etiology of orbital infection is direct spread of infection from the
paranasal sinuses, especially bacterial rhinosinusitis involving ethmoid air cells. Other
etiologies of orbital infection are trauma, foreign body, odontogenic infection.
Orbital infection includes a spectrum of entities ranging in severity from mild to vision- or
life-threatening.
Preseptal cellulitis
Preseptal (periorbital) cellulitis involves the anterior soft tissues of the eyelids, superficial to
the orbital septum.
Preseptal cellulitis is generally mild and much more common than orbital cellulitis.
Patients present with eyelid swelling and erythema.
Imaging shows subcutaneous fat stranding and swelling of the eyelids and face but normal
orbital fat.
Orbital cellulitis
Orbital cellulitis with epidural abscess: Axial contrast-enhanced CT through the orbits (left image) shows left
proptosis and both pre- and post-septal inflammatory change (red arrows), without a discrete fluid collection.
There is complete opacification of the left ethmoid sinus and opacification of the sphenoid sinus. CT through
the brain (right) demonstrates two locules of gas in the extra-axial space (yellow arrows) directly posterior to
the lefti frontal sinus, representing an epidural abscess.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Orbital (postseptal) cellulitis involves the muscles and fat deep to the orbital septum.
Orbital cellulitis is serious due to risk of complications such as abscess and intracranial
spread via the valveless ophthalmic veins.
Patients present with not only eyelid swelling and erythema, but also painful
ophthalmoplegia, chemosis, and/or proptosis.
Imaging shows orbital fat stranding, sometimes with extraocular muscle edema, proptosis,
or an intraconal or extraconal phlegmon (inflammatory soft tissue mass that has not yet
organized into an abscess).
Subperiosteal abscess
Subperiosteal abscess is a suppurative collection involving the bony orbit under its
periosteum (periorbital). It can arise associated with or independent of orbital cellulitis.
Imaging shows a convex rim-enhancing collection tracking along a bone surface, most
commonly the medial orbital wall in the setting of ethmoid sinusitis.
Neuro Head & Neck: 770