Malrotation and midgut volvulus (continued)
Malrotation without volvulus can have nonspecific symptoms, including feeding intolerance,
cyclic vomiting, and malabsorption. Therefore, it is essential to consider malrotation in a
child with abdominal symptoms.
75% present in the first month of life and 90% become symptomatic within one year.
The most important anatomy to demonstrate on every upper GI is the C-sweep of the
duodenum and position of the duodeno-jejunal junction (DJJ).
On frontal view, normal DJJ should be to the left ofthe left spinous pedicle at the level of the duodenal
bulb (L1).
On the lateral view, the normal duodenum first courses posteriorly into the retroperitoneum, inferiorly
while retroperitoneal, anteriorly across the spine (remaining in the retroperitoneum), and then superiorly
to meet thej jejunum at the DJJ in the peritoneal space.
Normal upper GI: Spot image
shows the duodeno-jejunal
junction (arrow) to the left of
midline, beyond the left pedicle
of the vertebral body.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan,
MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
On abdominal radiography, midgut volvulus most commonly appears as multiple dilated
loops of bowel. Less commonly, midgut volvulus may produce a double bubble sign from
duodenal obstruction. However, plain films can also be entirely normal in the setting of
malrotation and vomiting.
The classic upper GI findings of midgut volvulus is the corkscrew appearance of twisted
bowel. On CT or ultrasound, the superior mesenteric artery may be seen to the right of the
superior mesenteric vein.
In the absence of midgut volvulus, the diagnosis of malrotation can be challenging. The DJJ
is a mobile structure and can be manipulated during the upper GI exam. Even experienced
pediatric radiologists may occasionally disagree. Some clues to the presence of malrotation
include:
DJJ inferior to the duodenal bulb.
DJJ to the right of the left pedicle.
Cecum either more midline than typical or frankly in the left lower quadrant.
On CT or US: Inversion of normal relationship of SMA and SMV (normally SMV to the right of the SMA).
Color Doppler ultrasound or CT studies of the twisted mesenteric vessels demonstrates the whirlpool sign.
The treatment of malrotation with volvulus is the Ladd procedure:
Volvulus reduction, resection of necrotic bowel, and lysis of mesenteric adhesions ("Ladd" bands).
The small and large bowel are separated, with the small bowel positioned primarily on the patient's right
and the large bowel on the patient's left.
Appendectomy may be performed.
Peds: 1127