ACYANOTIC: INCREASED PULMONARY VENOUS FLOW (PULMONARY EDEMA)
Hypoplastic left heart (HLH)
Hypoplastic left heart (HLH)
syndrome represents a
hypoplastic
spectrum of congenital heart
aorta
anomalies characterized by
underdevelopment of any part of
the left heart including left atrium,
mitral valve, left ventricle, aortic
hypoplastic
left ventricle
valve, or aorta.
Survival is dependent on a patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA) with
resultant right to left shunting to
supply the systemic circulation.
The neonatal chest radiograph in HLH is usually normal, but HLH is classified as a
"pulmonary edema" entity.
Immediately after birth, the ductus arteriosus remains patent and pulmonary arterial resistance remains
high, sO blood continues to flow from the pulmonary artery to the aorta (systemic circulation) via the
PDA. After a few days, however, the ductus begins to close and pulmonary arterial resistance falls, leading
to increase in pulmonary blood flow and delayed blood clearance from the lungs. Cardiogenic shock can
ensue without operative management.
Note that despite the left heart hypoplasia, the heart does not appear small on imaging.
The surgical treatment of hypoplastic left heart is performed in three sequential stages,
starting with the Norwood procedure. This is described in detail later in the chapter.
Extracardiac shunt causing CHF
The two most common lesions to cause neonatal CHF are vein of Galen malformation and
hepatic nemangoendotelioma.
Aortic coarctation
Aortic coarctation is congenital focal
narrowing of the aorta in the region of
the ductus arteriosus. It may be preductal
(proximal to the ductus, illustrated on the
right), periductal, or postductal.
coarctation
The preductal form may cause congestive
right PA
ductus
heart failure (CHF) in infants due to
left ventricular obstruction, leading to
left PA
cardiomegaly and increased pulmonaryvenous flow. In contrast, the juxtaductal or
postductal variants present later in life in
Diagram demonstrates infantile-type preductal aortic
the teenage or early adult years as upper coarctation, with the coarctation located proximal to
extremity hypertension.
the ductus.
Aortic coarctation is associated with bicuspid aortic valve, which may become stenotic and
cause post-stenotic aortic dilation proximal to the site of coarctation. Other associations
include Turner syndrome (XO), Shone syndrome and intracerebral berry aneurysms.
In infants, aortic coarctation may produce acyanotic CHF. In adults, the classic radiographic
finding is the 3 sign representing the contour of the coarcted aorta in the left upper
mediastinum. Although rib notching is described as a classic finding, it is rarely seen.
Peds: 1109