Orbital abscess
Orbital abscess is an abscess located within the soft tissues of the orbit, due to consolidation
of orbital cellulitis or rupture of subperiosteal abscess.
Imaging shows, as with abscesses elsewhere, a focal rim-enhancing collection.
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
The cavernous sinus is the most common site of septic dural venous sinus thrombosis, due
to drainage of sites of medial facial, orbital, sinonasal, or dental infection.
Patients present with headache, fever, proptosis, chemosis, and cranial nerve palsies (e.g.,
ophthalmoplegia).
maging shows convex bulging of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus and filling defects on
post-contrast images. Indirect signs include dilatation (and/or thrombosis) of the superior
ophthalmic vein.
phaapenyaais
Endophthalmitis refers to bacterial or, less commonly, fungal infection within the globe,
involving the vitreous and/or aqueous humors. Further extensive involvement of the ocular
wall and periocular orbital tissues is called panophthalmitis.
Most cases are due to direct inoculation, such as by trauma, surgery, or corneal ulcer.
maging shows thickening and enhancement of the ocular wall, periocular fat stranding, and
abnormal high density/signal of the vitreous.
Dacryoadenitis
Dacryoadenitis refers to lacrimal gland inflammation, which can be due to acute viral or
bacterial infection. Other causes include idiopathic orbital inflammation, IgG4-related
disease, and granulomatous diseases, which are discussed in the next section, as well as
Sjogren syndrome.
Dacryoadenitis appears as diffuse gland enlargement (unilateral or bilateral) that generally
molds to orbital structures but may displace the globe inferomedially.
Dacryocystitis
AN
Axial (left image) and coronal noncontrast CT through the orbits shows a rim-enhancement cystic structure in
the left lacrimal fossa (yellow arrows) with surrounding soft tissue stranding, representing an enlarged lacrimal
sac in the setting of dacryocystitis. Note communication with the nasolacrimal duct (red arrow).
Dacryocystitis refers to lacrimal sac inflammation typically secondary to nasolacrimal duct
obstruction and subsequent bacterial infection.
In infants, dacryocystitis usually complicates congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction
dacryostenosis) or dacryocystocele. Obstruction can also be acquired in older adults.
Dacryocystitis appears as a prominent rim-enhancing structure centered in the lacrimal
fossa near the medial canthus with adjacent preseptal fat stranding.
Neuro Head & Neck: 771