Multiple sclerosis (MS; continued)
Lesions that are dark on T1-weighted images are called "black holes" and are associated
with more severe demyelination and axonal loss.
Chronic MS leads to cortical atrophy and thinning of the corpus callosum. MR spectroscopy
can mimic high grade glioma, with J NAA and T choline.
Tumefactive MS describes the occasionally seen ring enhancement and mass-like
appearance of an active MS plaque. In contrast to a brain tumor, the demyelinating lesion
will not have any significant mass effect, and the ring of enhancement is usually incomplete.
Enhancing tumefactive lesion
in the same patient as the
previous page, with known
MS: Axial post-contrast T1-
weighted image shows a ring-
enhancing lesion in the right
middle-cerebellar peduncle
(arrow).
Although ring enhancement
is nonspecific, the lack of any
appreciable mass effect (the
adjacent fourth ventricle is
normal in size and shape)
suggests a demyelinating
lesion.
Concentric (Balo) sclerosis
Concentric (Balo) sclerosis is a very rare variant of MS with pathognomonic alternating
concentric bands of normal and abnormal myelin. It is seen more often in younger patients.
Marburg variant (acute multiple sclerosis)
Marburg variant of MS is a fulminant manifestation of MS, leading to death within months.
NMO spectrum disease
NMO spectrum disease (NMOSD) (previously described as Devic disease or NMO) is a
demyelinating disease, distinct from MS, which involves both the optic nerves and spinal
cord. NMOSD confers a worse prognosis compared to MS.
NMO-IgG, an antibody to aquaporin 4, is highly specific for NMOSD. NMO-IgG activates the
complement cascade and induces demyelination.
Imaging findings are discussed in more detail in the "Spine" chapter.
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a monophasic demyelinating disorder seen
primarily in children that typically occurs after a viral infection or vaccination. The majority
of patients make a full recovery, but a minority suffer permanent neurologic sequelae.
Imaging findings can be identical to MS, and occasionally cases of presumed ADEM will be
reclassified as MS due to polyphasic clinical course. Similar to MS, ADEM may involve the
brain, brainstem, or spinal cord.
Optic neuritis and spinal cord involvement can be seen in ADEM, as with MS.
The Hurst variant (acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis) is a rapidly fulminant form of
ADEM that leads to death within days.
Imaging of the Hurst variant shows multifocal T2 prolongation and associated white matter hemorrhage,
which may appear as confluent hematomas.
Neuro Brain: 733