BENIGN SOLID RENAL MASSES
Mesoblastic nephroma
Mesoblastic nephroma is a benign tumor
that appears identical to Wilms by imaging,
but occurs in younger children typically <1
year old.
Although benign, mesoblastic nephroma is
always removed surgically since the classic
and more aggressive variants cannot be
reliably distinguished radiographically.
They are predominantly distinguished from
Wilms tumor by the age of the child.
Like Wilms tumor, mesoblastic nephroma
arises from persistent metanephric
blastema.
Mesoblastic nephroma should not
Mesoblastic nephroma: Axial contrast-enhanced CT in
be confused with multilocular cystic
a neonate shows a large mass replacing the right renal
parenchyma (arrows), containing numerous foci of
nephroma, which is a cystic renal mass
necrosis.
with a bimodal age distribution, and is not Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston Children's
related to the metanephric blastema.
Hospital.
Nephroblastomatosis
Nephroblastomatosis: Sagittal ultrasound (left image) of the right kidney shows marked lobular enlargement
of the kidney and reduced echogenicity of the renal cortex. Axial contrast-enhanced CT (right) shows bilateral
nephromegaly and numerous lobulated, relatively low attenuation rounded nodules and masses (arrows).
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Nephroblastomatoss is the persistence of metanephric blastema. The term nephrogenic
rest is used when metanephric blastema persists beyond 36 weeks gestation.
On imaging, nephroblastomatosis may appear as a discrete, homogeneous, nonenhancing
renal mass with a hypodense rind. Nephroblastomatosis is commonly multifocal, confluent,
and bilateral.
Nephroblastomatosis is a precursor to Wilms tumor, SO frequent screening is performed.
Worrisome findings on screening include rapid growth, inhomogeneity, increased sphericity
and enhancement.
Nephroblastomatosis may be peripheral or central. While rare, the latter tends to more frequently
progress to Wilms tumor.
Nephroblastomatoss is present in 30% of all Wilms nephrectomies, and in all cases of bilateral Wilms
tumors.
Peds: 1153