Distribution of subarachnoid hemorrhage
The pattern of SAH may provide a clue to the location of the ruptured aneurysm. However,
multiple aneurysms are seen in up to 20% of patients with SAH, and subarachnoid blood
may redistribute if the patient was found down.
Hemorrhage in the anterior interhemispheric fissure suggests an anterior communicating
artery aneurysm (33% of intracranial aneurysms).
Hemorrhage in the suprasellar cistern suggests a posterior communicating artery aneurysm
(also 33% of intracranial aneurysms). Rarely, P-comm aneurysm rupture can result in
isolated subdural hemorrhage.
Hemorrhage in the Sylvian fissure suggests a middle cerebral artery aneurysm (20% of
intracranial aneurysms).
Hemorrhage in the perimesencephalic cistern suggests either a basilar tip aneurysm (5% of
intracranial aneurysms), which has a high morbidity, or the relatively benign nonaneurysmal
perimesencephalic subarachnoid hemorrhage (subsequently discussed).
Grading of subarachnoid hemorrhage
The Hunt and Hess score is the clinical grading scale for aneurysmal SAH and is based solely
on symptoms, without imaging. Grade lis the lowest grade, with only a mild headache.
Grade V is the most severe, with coma or extensor posturing.
The modified Fischer scale classifies the CT appearance of aneurysmal SAH and correlates
with risk of delayed cerebral ischemia.
Thin SAH (1 mm) is grade 1 without intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and grade 2 with IVH. Thick SAH
(21 mm) is grade 3 without IVH and grade 4 with IVH.
Complications of subarachnoid hemorrhage
Vasospasm is the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in patients who survive
the initial episode of SAH. The peak incidence of vasospasm occurs most frequently 7-10
days after aneurysm rupture and resolves spontaneously after 21 days. Vasospasm results in
delayed cerebral ischemia, which can cause infarction.
PCA
SCA
basilar -
AICA
3
1
vert
Vasospasm: Two coronal-oblique maximum-intensity projection images from subsequent CT angiograms,
in the plane of the basilar artery. The initial study (left image) shows severe narrowing of the basilar artery,
left AICA (right not visible), and distal vertebral arteries. The follow-up study (right image) was performed
after endovascular treatment, which shows a normal caliber of the basilar and left vertebral arteries.
The gold standard for diagnosing vasospasm is digital subtraction angiography (DSA), which
allows for concurrent treatment. Disadvantages of DSA include need for trained personnel,
radiation exposure, contrast load, as well as potential for procedure-related complications.
Neuro Brain: 680