Neuroblastoma (continued)
On MRI, neuroblastoma often invades into neural foramina and the spinal canal. Diffusion is
often restricted, reflecting hypercellularity.
Neuroblastoma is a atecholaminesecreting tumor and therefore positive on I-123 MIBG
scintigraphy.
Other catecholaminesecreting tumors Pheochromocytoma, carcinoid and medullary thyroid cancer) are
rare in children.
Metastases may be found in 75% of patients and commonly involve the bone marrow
(typically permeative and lytic). A classic presentation of metastatic neuroblastoma is an
intracranial, subdural mass originating from the marrow.
The prior International Neuroblasoma Staging System (INSS, 1993) for neuroblastoma
surgical staging may be helpful to know, and is summarized below. "Midline" is defined as
the contralateral edge of the vertebral body (i.e., for a left neuroblastoma, "midline" is the
right lateral edge of the vertebral body)
Stage :: Tumor limited to organ of origin (e.g., adrenal). 75% two-year survival.
Stage I: Local spread (nodes may be positive), but no disease crossing midline. 75% two-year survival.
Stage II: Local spread, crosses midline. 25% two-year survival.
Stage IV: Distant metastases. 25% two-year survival.
Stage IVS: Stage lor II with metastases confined to skin, liver, and bone marrow, and age <1 year (better
prognosis than Stage III or IV). May also apply to children up to 18 months. 75% two-year survival.
A more recent system by the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG, 2009) features
a set of image-defined risk factors (IDRF), such as invasion into adjacent organs, bones or
vessels, to stage the extent of disease.
Stage L1: Localized tumor, not involving vital structures defined in IDRF and confined to one body
compartment. 95% survival rate.
Stage L2: Locoregional tumor with presence of 1+ IDRF.
Stage M: Distant metastases (excluding stage MS), with 10-30% survival rate.
Stage MS: Metastatic disease confined to skin, liver and/or bone marrow disease in children less than 18
months. More favorable prognosis with 75-100% survival rate.
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroma is a benign neurogenic tumor that appears similar to neuroblastoma on
imaging. Gangloneuroblastoma is intermediate in biological behavior between benign
ganglioneuroma and malignant neuroblastoma. It is thought that neuroblastoma may
differentiate into either of these lesions.
In contrast to neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroma affects slightly older children (most
common age of a ganglioneuroma patient is 6 years old) and only 50% of ganglioneuromas
are positive on I-123 MIBG scintigraphy. MRI classically shows restricted diffusion of a
neuroblastoma, but not in ganglioneuroma.
Adrenal hemorrhage (in neonates)
Adrenal hemorrhage is the most common adrenal "mass" in neonates, and most often
associated with difficult deliveries or perinatal stress related to maternal diabetes, breech
delivery and sepsis.
It is typically diagnosed by ultrasound as a hypoechoic avascular suprarenal mass.
Hemorrhage may appear similar to neuroblastoma on initial ultrasound, but a follow-up
scan would demonstrate involution. Old hemorrhage may calcify.
Peds: 1156