Chondrosarcoma (continued)
Chondrosarcoma is a malignant tumor of cartilage. Like osteosarcoma, there are multiple
primary and secondary variants.
Secondary forms arise from enchondroma (more commonly in the Maffucci and Ollier
familial enchondromatoses), Paget disease, and osteochondroma (more common in familial
osteochondromatoss.
An osteochondroma with a cartilage cap thickness of >2 cm is highly suggestive of chondrosarcoma.
The conventional intramedullary) chondrosarcoma subtype is most common. On imaging,
chondrosarcoma is typically an expansile lesion in the medullary bone, with ring and arc
chondroid matrix. The tumor causes thickening and endosteal scalloping of the cortex, and
there is often an associated soft-tissue mass.
The dedifferentiated subtype of chondrosarcoma is aggressive and may contain
fibrosarcoma or osteosarcoma elements.
Other subtypes of chondrosarcoma include the rare mesenchymal and clear cell variants.
LESIONS OF FIBROUS ORIGIN
Benign: Nonossifying fibroma / fibrous cortical defect
Nonossifying fibroma: Frontal (left
image) and lateral (right image)
radiographs of the proximal lateral
tibia in a 17-year-old male show
a well-defined lucent lesion in
the medial tibial metaphysis. The
lesion features a faint sclerotic
rim in continuity with the thinned
lateral cortex (arrow).
Nonossifying fibroma (sometimes called a fibroxanthoma) is an asymptomatic and
common incidental radiolucent lesion in the long bones (especially the leg) in children and
adolescents. Nonossifying fibroma and fibrous cortical defect are thought to represent
the same lesion; the term nonossifying fibroma is generally reserved for larger (>2 cm) or
symptomatic lesions. They are the same histologically. These lesions are believed to arise
from the periosteum.
The radiographic appearance is usually diagnostic and demonstrates a lucent lesion with a
narrow zone of transition, sclerotic margin, and no matrix calcification. CT or MRI may show
cortical disruption or thinning, representing replacement of the cortex by fibrous tissue.
Most lesions undergo spontaneous sclerotic involution as the patient reaches adulthood.
MSK: 950