NEONATAL CHOLESTATIC JAUNDICE
Approach to pathologic neonatal jaundice
In contrast to the unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia of the benign and self-limited
physiologic jaundice of the newborn, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is never normal and is
due to hepatic or biliary dysfunction.
There are innumerable causes of conjugated nyperolirubinemia, including biliary atresia,
Alagille syndrome, bile acid synthetic defects, metabolic disease, alpha-l-antitrypsin
deficiency, and infectious etiologies.
Alagille syndrome features hereditary cholestasis from paucity of intrahepatic bile ducts, and peripheral
pulmonary stenosis.
The goal of imaging is to differentiate between biliary atresia (approximately 25% of
neonatal conjugated yperbilirubinemia, and "neonatal hepatitis," which is a wastebasket
diagnosis for all other causes combined. Tc-99m-HIDA hepatobiliary scintigraphy is the test
of choice to distinguish between these two entities.
Patients may be premedicated with 5 days of phenobarbital to stimulate hepatocyte activity prior to
hepatobiliary scintigraphy, although this varies by institution.
The HIDA agent is actively transported intoi the hepatocyte and excreted (not conjugated) into the bile.
Biliary atresia requires prompt repair to prevent irreversible liver damage. The treatment of
neonatal hepatitis is nonsurgical.
Neonatal hepatitis
Neonatal hepatitis: 60-minute delay HIDA (left image) shows uptake in the liver but with a large amount of
blood pool activity. There is uptake in the bladder and the diaper, but no bowel uptake. Delayed 24-hour image
(middle image) also does not show bowel uptake, but there is abnormal persistent hepatic uptake, which
is suggestive of hepatitis. A follow-up exam was performed a few weeks later (right image), which showed
normal hepatic uptake and small bowel excretion, confirming resolution of neonatal hepatitis.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
Hepatobiliary scintigraphy shows poor hepatic excretion, delayed hepatic clearance (beyond
12 hours), and variable bowel excretion.
Biliary atresia can be effectively ruled out if there is any excretion into the GI tract.
Biliary atresia
Ultrasound may not be able to distinguish between biliary atresia and neonatal hepatitis,
though the triangular cord sign representing the obliterated common hepatic duct can be
seen in the region of the porta hepatis. An absent or atretic gallbladder on ultrasound is
suggestive of biliary atresia, but a gallbladder is seen in 20% of cases. The main hepatic
artery is also often enlarged in the setting biliary atresia, with a HA:PV ratio >0.45 suggestive
of biliary atresia.
Hepatobiliary scintigraphy shows normal hepatic tracer uptake and clearance but no
excretion into the small bowel after 24 hours.
Peds: 1139