MAMMOGRAPHIC USE OF BI-RADS 3
There is data to support the assignment of BI-RADS 3 in the following three situations, which
are not definitively benign but have been shown to have less than 2% risk of cancer.
Circumscribed, benign-appearing solid mass
A probably benign solid mass must meet certain mammographic criteria. Its shape must be
round or oval, and its margins must be circumscribed. The mass cannot have any associated
suspicious microcalcifications.
Typically, any visible mammographic mass should also be evaluated with ultrasound. For
a mass to be considered probably benign by ultrasound it must be oval (may have two or
three smooth lobulations) with a visible echogenic capsule AND lack any malignant features,
or must be uniformly hyperechoic AND lack any malignant features (see later section on
ultrasound differentiation of benign and malignant solid masses). If both mammographic
and sonographic criteria are met, a mass may be assigned BI-RADS 3.
A probably benign solid mass that has demonstrated at least two years of stability can
usually be considered benign (BI-RADS 2).
Any interval growth or suspicious change in morphology should be recommended for biopsy.
Grouped punctate round calcifications
Punctate calcifications are a subset of round calcifications that are <0.5 mm in size. It is
usually necessary to use spot-compression magnification views to accurately characterize
calcifications.
Grouped punctate calcifications (25 calcifications/cm) on a baseline exam can be diagnosed
as probably benign (BI-RADS 3). Note that the morphology must be clearly punctate
or round, and the distribution must be in a group. For instance, a group of amorphous
calcifications is indeterminate and usually warrants biopsy. Similarly, although rare, punctate
or round calcifications in a linear or segmental distribution would be suspicious.
Focal asymmetry
Assuming no ultrasound correlate is seen, a focal asymmetry seen on a baseline exam can
be assessed as probably benign (BI-RADS 3) after a thorough imaging workup.
Breast: 396