emdimess/lendimopatay
Tendinosis (also called tendinopathy) is mucoid degeneration of the tendon, without active
inflammation.
In the shoulder, tendinopathy of the rotator cuff is common. The normal lamellar structure
of the rotator cuff tendon is lost, and the tendon appears expansile and intermediate in
signal intensity.
Overview of rotator cuff tears
Tears of the rotator cuff can be partial or complete.
Complete rotator cuff tears allow communication between the subacroma/subdetod
bursa and the glenohumeral joint.
The footprint is the attachment of the tendons at the greater tuberosity. The critical zone
is a potentially undervascularized portion of the distal supraspinatus tendon approximately
1 cm proximal to the insertion on the footprint. Relatively decreased vascular supply may
predispose to rupture in this location.
Partial-thickness rotator cuff tear
Partial articular surface supraspinatus tear:
Coronal T1-weighted MR arthrogram with fat
suppression demonstrates discontinuity of
the articular surface of the distal fibers of the
supraspinatus tendon (arrow).
Case courtesy Kirstin M. Small, MD, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
The most commonly injured rotator cuff muscle is the supraspinatus, followed by the
infraspinatus. The teres minor is the least commonly injured rotator cuff muscle.
A partial-thickness: tear features abnormal signal in a portion of the muscle or tendon but
not extending through its entire thickness. MR arthrography will not show communication
between the injected glenohumeral joint and the ubatcroma/subdetod bursa.
Partial-thickness tears can be challenging to diagnose without MR arthrography. Reparative granulation
tissue can obscure the abnormal signal that would otherwise indicate a tear.
Partial tears can be divided into oursal-surface, articular-surrace, or intrasubstance tears.
Articular-surface tears are by far the most common type of partial tear.
A rim rent tear is the most common type of partial tear. Also called the PASTA lesion
(partial thickness articular supraspinatus tendon avulsion), the rim rent tear is an avulsion-
type partial tear of the articular surface of the supraspinatus as it inserts on the greater
tuberosity.
Less commonly, an analogous lesion can be seen in the infraspinatus.
The PAINT (partial articular tear with intratendinous extension) lesion is a partial rotator cuff
tear at the articular surface that also extends into the tendon.
MSK: 1049