Adenomyomatosis (continued)
Adenomyomatosis is often seen in the gallbladder fundus but can be diffuse or focal. It can
be difficult to differentiate focal adenomyomatosis from malignancy.
The ultrasound hallmark of adenomyomatosis is the comet-tail artifact due to reflections off
tiny crystals seen in a focally thickened and echogenic gallbladder wall.
The typical MRI appearance of adenomyomatosis is focal, bubbly T2 hyperintense thickening
along the gallbladder fundus.
Gallbladder polyps
Most gallbladder polyps are benign cholesterol polyps that
are part of the hyperplastic cholecystosis spectrum. Rarely
(<5%), polyps may be premalignant adenomas.
Gallbladder polyps are usually incidental and asymptomatic,
but may cause right upper quadrant pain or even
cholecystitis if they obstruct the cystic duct.
The following characteristics, known as the six S's, increase
the risk for a polyp being malignant:
Size >10 mm or rapid growth. As a caveat, ultrasound has limited
sensitivity and specificity in detecting small polyps (<10 mm),
especially in the presence of gallstones.
Single: A solitary polyp is more suspicious for malignancy. In
contrast, benign cholesterol polyps tend to be multiple.
Sessile (broad-based): Sessile morphology is suspicious. A polyp
is more likely benign if pedunculated.
Stones: The presence of stones may induce chronic
inflammation, which can predispose towards malignancy.
Primary Sclerosing cholangitis increases risk of malignancy.
Sixty (age) or greater.
In patients with several of these high-risk features,
Gallbladder polyp:
Sagittal and transverse views
cholecystectomy should be considered in the presence of a
of the gallbladder show a small
polyp greater than 10 mm in size.
non-shadowing echogenic lesion
The typical ultrasound appearance of a polyp is a non-
(arrows). After repositioning the
mobile, non-shadowing polypoid or sessile lesion extending patient, this was shown to be non-
mobile.
from the wall into the lumen of the gallbladder. There may
be vascular flow in the stalk.
The main differential consideration is adherent sludge, which will not have any vascular flow.
GI: 136