Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET; continued)
On CT, DNET appears hypodense and occasionally calcifies. On MRI, DNETS show a
circumscribed bubbly appearance with T2 prolongation and a bright rim or hyperintense ring
sign on FLAIR. The tumor can be heterogeneous and show enhancement.
DNETS frequently coexist with focal cortical dysplasia, and cortical expansion is a feature
more commonly found in tumors than in pure cortical malformations.
Ganglioglioma
Ganglioglioma: Axial FLAIR: shows a cystic
lesion in the right temporal lobe with an
associated large solid nodule (arrows). There
is mild surrounding edema and mild mass
effect with midline shift to the left.
Case courtesy Amir Zamani, MD, Brigham
and Women's Hospital.
Ganglioglioma is a WHO grade 1 glioneuronal tumor. A more aggressive variant is the
anaplastic ganglioglioma (grade 3).
Gangliogliomas usually present in children or young adults.
Ganglioglioma is most commonly located in the temporal lobe (3/4 of cases), involving
the cortex.
They can also be found in cerebellum and near the conus medullaris, mimicking myxopapillary
ependymoma.
The imaging appearance is variable. A common appearance is a circumscribed cystic mass
with enhancing mural nodule, often with calcification, but ganglioglioma can also be solidly
enhancing or nonenhancing.
Gangliogliomas frequently coexist with focal cortical dysplasia.
Multinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumor (MVNT)
MVNT is a recently recognized WHO grade 1 entity. It usually presents in young and middle-
aged adults with seizure or may be an incidental finding.
MVNT is most commonly located in the temporal or frontal lobes, centered at the deep
layers of cortex and juxtacortical white matter.
On MRI, MVNT characteristically appears as a cluster of bubbles: small, circumscribed
hyperintense nodules on T2-weighted imaging, usually without enhancement or mass effect.
Desmoplastic infantile astrocytoma and ganglioglioma (DIA/DIG)
DIA and DIG are classified together as WHO grade 1 glial/glioneuronal tumors. They present
in infants usually with progressive head enlargement.
DIA/DIG is most commonly located in the frontal and parietal lobes, involving the cortex
and attaching to the eptomeninges. However, they are quite large at presentation, often
spanning more than one lobe of the cerebral hemisphere.
On MRI, DIA/DIG characteristically appears as a large multicystic and solid mass (cysts with
mural nodule). The solid component enhances avidly.
Neuro Brain: 713