Vein of Galen malformation (continued)
Vein of Galen malformation is dilation of the vein of Galen (in the pineal region) caused by
an arteriovenous fistula.
Vein of Galen aneurysm is a shunt lesion which may cause high-output cardiac failure,
leading to hydrops.
FETAL SPINE
Evaluation of the fetal spine
In the normal fetal spine, three primary ossification centers are seen on transverse axial
plane for each vertebra, one for the vertebral body (centrum) and one on either side for the
posterior elements (neural arch).
It is important to examine the entire spine, especially the caudal end, to assess for neural
tube defects. The spinal level can be determined by identifying the last ossified vertebra
(presumed to be S4 in the second trimester, and S5 in the third trimester).
ST
BL
Transverse ultrasound through the fetal abdomen at level of the stomach (ST) shows the normal three
ossification centers of the vertebra (yellow arrows). Sagittal ultrasound shows the normal fetal spine as two
parallel echogenic lines (yellow arrows) that converge at the sacrum (red arrow). It is important to assess the
integrity of the skin overlying the spine. "BL" denotes the bladder.
Spina dysraphism / Myelomeningocele
Spinal dysraphism is a spectrum of congenital anomalies due to incomplete closure of the
neural tube. When this results in a defect in the posterior neural arch, the term spina bifida
is used.
Meninges and neural tissue can protrude through the dorsal defect, resulting in
meningocele (meninges only) and myelomeningocele (both meninges and neural tissue).
Myelomeningocele is more common than meningocele and occurs most often in the lumbar
spine, followed by the cervical spine. Determination of the spinal level is useful for outcome
counseling.
Imaging shows a cystic lesion protruding from the spinal canal at the midline back, with
associated splaying of the vertebral pedicles/laminae and a dorsal skin defect.
Other types of spinal dysraphism are discussed in the "Spine" chapter.
Obstetrics: 352