Staging of endometrial carcinoma (continued)
mass
Endometrial carcinoma, stage IB:
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI (left image) shows a large mass distending the endometrial canal and invading into
the myometrium, and protruding into the cervix (yellow arrows). No definite cervical stromal invasion is seen.
Sagittal postcontrast fat-suppressed T1-weighted MRI (right image) shows that the mass is relatively
hypoenhancing relative to the myometrium. The extent of myometrial invasion is best appreciated, with foci of
invasion extending >50% of the myometrial wall (red arrow).
Case courtesy Cheryl. Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
OTHER DISEASES OF THE ENDOMETRIUM/ENDOMETRIAL CAVITY
Endometrial fluid
Trace amount of fluid in the endometrial canal can be normal finding, particularly in
premenopausal patients (e.g., menses). Larger amount of fluid is always abnormal, and it
can be due to spontaneous abortion.
In a postmenopausal woman, endometrial fluid can be due to cervical stenosis, and a careful
evaluation for cervical malignancy should be performed.
Infection
Endometritis is inflammation or infection of the endometrium, commonly seen postpartum.
Imaging findings are often normal in uncomplicated cases. Gas in the uterus >3 weeks post delivery
is suspicious for endometritis. Other less specific features include an enlarged (and tender) uterus,
associated with endometrial thickening. Note that gas in the uterus can be found up to three weeks
postpartum (seen in 7% of normal cases).
Pyometra (pus within the uterus) is very rare and usually due to outflow obstruction, usually
due to cervical malignancy - which needs to be excluded - but untreated endometritis is
another potential cause.
Hemorrhage
Intrauterine hemorrhage can occur for a variety of reasons in both the gravid and non-gravid
uterus. In the non-gravid uterus (outside of menstruation), it may be seen with endometrial
polyps, endometrial hyperplasia, endometrial carcinoma, and fibroids.
If a patient has had a recent miscarriage or dilation and curettage, blood clot (nonvascular)
should be distinguished from retained products of conception (vascular). This is further
explained within the Obstetrics chapter.
GU: 305