GASTROINTESTINAL
LIVER-SPLEEN IMAGING
Radiotracer: Tc-99m sulfur colloid
Sulfur colloid is taken up by reticuloendothelial cells, which are found in the liver, spleen,
and bone marrow. Sulfur colloid is also taken up by Kupffer cells in the liver. Hepatic Kupffer
cells make up only approximately 10% of the liver mass.
80-90% of sulfur colloid particles are taken up by the liver. Most of the remainder is taken
up by the spleen, and a small amount taken up in the bone marrow. The bone marrow is not
normally seen at typical windowing levels.
Although Tc-99m has a physical half-life of 6 hours, sulfur colloid is rapidly cleared with a
biologic half-life of 2-3 minutes.
76
76
Normal liver-spleen scan following
administration of 4.2 mCi Tc-99m
sulfur colloid shows homogeneous
uptake in the liver and spleen.
Note splenic uptake is slightly
lower in intensity than the liver.
Bone marrow uptake is faint.
0
0
ANTERIORF Pic1.9mm
POSTERIOR Pixc1.9mm
Focal decreased hepatic uptake on sulfur colloid scan
The most common cause of a photopenic defect (complete absence of radiotracer) is a
hepatic cyst. It may be difficult to distinguish focal decreased uptake from a photopenic
defect if the lesion is small.
Most hepatic masses cause focal decreased radiocolloid uptake, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), adenoma, and abscess. Focal decreased uptake should raise concern for
HCC in a patient with any risk factors for HCC such as cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis.
Focal increased hepatic uptake on sulfur colloid scan
Focal nodular nyperplasia, discussed below, may nyperconcentrate radiocolloid.
Ar regenerating nodule in a cirrhotic liver can cause focal increased radiocolloid uptake.
Budd-Chiari syndrome, or hepatic vein thrombosis, can lead to increased uptake in the
caudate lobe in the later stage of disease.
Colloid shift
Colloid shift is increased sulfur colloid accumulation within the spleen and bone marrow. It
suggests liver dysfunction, most commonly due to cirrhosis.
Diffuse pulmonary uptake
Diffuse pulmonary uptake on a sulfur colloid scan is nonspecific, and can be seen in:
Cirrhosis.
COPD with superimposed infection.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
High serum aluminum (either due to antacids or excess aluminum in the colloid preparation).
Nucs: 462