FETAL ABDOMEN
Anomalies of the fetal gastrointestinal tract may cause polyhydramnios due to disruption of
swallowing or impaired absorption of swallowed amniotic fluid if the anomaly is proximal.
The amniotic fluid volume is typically normal in abnormalities of the mid or distal GI tract.
Esophageal atresia
Esophageal atresia is a blind-ending esophagus, due to incomplete division of the foregut in
early embryologic development.
Esophageal atresia is usually associated with a tracheoesophageal fistula.
The classic ultrasound findings of esophageal atresia are polyhydramnios and an absent
stomach bubble.
Duodenal atresia (DA)
l
duo
Two transverse ultrasound images through the fetal abdomen (left image) show the dilated stomach (st) and
dilated proximal duodenum (duo) representing the double bubble sign. The image on the right confirms that
these two dilated structures connect (arrow).
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Duodenal atresia (DA) causes duodenal obstruction from lack of recanalization of the
duodenal lumen. Duodenal atresia is the most common cause of fetal duodenal obstruction.
DA has a strong association with Down syndrome. If a double bubble sign is seen, a careful
screen for additional findings of Down syndrome should be performed (e.g., thorough
cardiac exam, nuchal fold if 16-20 weeks, etc).
The classic appearance of DA is the double bubble sign, representing a dilated stomach and
dilated proximal duodenum. The differential diagnosis of the double bubble sign includes
duodenal web, stenosis, and annular pancreas.
Distal fetal bowel obstruction
A distal fetal bowel obstruction may be structural or functional.
Structural causes of distal bowel obstruction include jejunal atresia, ileal atresia, and
anorectal malformation.
Anorectal malformation is commonly associated with additional abnormalities, including the VACTERL
association (vertebral, anorectal, cardiac, tracheoesophageal, renal, and limb anomalies).
Functional bowel obstruction may be due to Hirschsprung disease or meconium ileus.
Hirschsprung disease results in a functional obstruction due to absent distal enteric ganglion cells.
Meconium ileus causes obstruction from impaction of meconium in the ileum. Nearly all infants with
meconium ileus have cystic fibrosis; however, meconium ileus is rarely identified before the third
trimester.
Obstetrics: 359