Bone biopsies
Planning CT image with grid (top left image), with
patient prone. The mixed lytic and sclerotic lesion
(arrows) of the left iliac bone was targeted.
Intraprocedural CT-fluoroscopic image (top right
image) shows the bone biopsy device progressing
towards the lesion. The lesion is obscured by streak
and beam hardening artifact.
Intraprocedural CT-fluoroscopic image (left image)
shows the coaxial biopsy device traversing the region
of the lesion, although the lesion is obscured. Careful
correlation of landmarks is necessary in this case.
Pathology was metastatic breast cancer.
Most bone biopsies are performed with CT guidance. Lesions that are occult on CT but
apparent on MR can generally be targeted by CT using landmarks. MR-guided biopsy may
also be performed in suitable cases.
Similar to fluoroscopic interventions, patient dose should be maintained as low as
reasonably achievable. A major contribution to patient dose is the initial planning CT with
the grid. This should be performed in a dose-reduced manner, if possible. Intraprocedural
CT-fluoroscopy generally yields lower patient dose compared to spiral CT acquisitions.
To reduce operator dose during CT fluoroscopy, take a step back and stand behind in the
wings of the CT gantry. Operator dose is 100 times less in this location compared to the
standard location standing next to the patient at the opening of the CT gantry.
There are several manual and battery-powered drill devices available.
Lucent lesions generally have higher diagnostic yield than sclerotic lesions.
Similar to targeting of soft tissue biopsies, the most avidly enhancing component or region
of highest FDG uptake should be targeted, as long as it is safe to do SO.
Vertebral biopsies
The safest approach to biopsy a vertebral body is transpedicular, where the biopsy needle
traverses the pedicle. The bony walls of the pedicle protect the needle from inadvertently
traversing the spinal canal.
Biopsies for osteomyelitis
The sensitivity of biopsy for diagnosing osteomyelitis is highly variable in the literature, but
in general it is quite low.
Therefore, biopsy should not be performed to diagnose osteomyelitis in equivocal cases.
Rather, it is useful to obtain microbial cultures and sensitivities when imaging already
confirms osteomyelitis.
MSK: 1083