INTRAPARENCHYMAL HEMORRHAGE
IMAGING OF HEMORRHAGE
CT imaging of hemorrhage
Noncontrast CT is usually the first imaging study performed in the emergency setting
for a patient with a sudden neurologic deficit, headache, seizure, or altered level of
consciousness.
CT is highly sensitive for detection of hyperacute/acute intracranial hemorrhage, which
appears nyperattenuating relative to brain parenchyma and CSF.
Acute hemorrhage may be nearly isoattenuating to water in severe anemia (hemoglobin <8 mg/dL).
The CT angiographic (CTA) spot sign describes the presence of small enhancing focus or foci
within an acute intracerebral hemorrhage on CTA, which is separate from adjacent vessels
and is not seen on noncontrast CT. This is thought to represent active hemorrhage and is a
predictor of hematoma expansion and poor clinical outcome.
Angiographic spot sign: Axial noncontrast CT (left image) demonstrates a left frontal acute intraparenchymal
hemorrhage (yellow arrow). Axial CTA (right image) shows a hyperdense focus at the periphery of the
intraparenchymal hematoma that does not communicate with any vessels and is not present on the
noncontrast images, compatible with active hemorrhage (red arrow).
MR imaging of hemorrhage
MR imaging of hemorrhage is complex. The characteristics of blood products change on T1-
and T2-weighted sequences as the iron in hemoglobin evolves through physiologic stages:
Intracellular oxyhemoglobin - deoxygenation -
Intracellular deoxyhemoglobin - oxidation -
Intracellular methemoglobin - cell lysis -
Extracellular methemoglobin - chelation -
Hemosiderin and ferritin
Each stage of this evolution adheres to a reasonably constant time course in the intra-axial
space and allows the radiologist to "date" the hemorrhage based on the unique signal
characteristics on T1- and T2-weighted images for each stage.
In general, all stages of hemorrhage are isointense or slightly dark on T1-weighted images,
except for the methemoglobin stages, which are bright.
Methemoglobin is bright on both T1- and T2-weighted images, except for intracellular
methemoglobin, which is dark on T2-weighted images.
Neuro Brain: 693