Hepatoblastoma
Hepatoblastoma: Contrast-enhanced axial CT shows al heterogeneous mass with mixed areas of enhancement
and necrosis completely replacing the liver parenchyma. There is a hypoattenuating lesion expanding the IVC
(arrow), representing tumor thrombus.
Hepatoblastoma is a malignant embryonal neoplasm that is the most common primary
liver tumor of early childhood (usually under age of 5 years), and the third most common
childhood abdominal malignancy overall (after neuroblastoma and Wilms tumor).
Hepatoblastoma occurs in children slightly older than those affected by infantile hemangioma and
mesenchymal hamartoma. Less than 10% of cases occur during the neonatal period.
Hepatoblastoma is associated with several genetic anomalies and syndromes, including:
Beckwth-Wiedemann (q6 month screening ultrasound is performed in these patients).
Familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome.
Fetal alcohol syndrome.
Wilms tumor.
Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is markedly elevated (often greater than 1000 ng/mL). Precocious
puberty may result from elevated bHCG.
A classic radiographic finding of hepatoblastoma is right upper quadrant calcification.
Cross-sectional imaging shows a large well-defined lobulated mass that is predominantly
solid, heterogeneous and enhancing, with propensity for portal vein and hepatic vein
invasion.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) typically occurs in children over the age of 5, and is the
second most common liver malignancy in children. Similar to adults, HCC is usually seen in
the background of cirrhosis. AFP is elevated, as in hepatoblastoma.
Pediatric causes of cirrhosis include alpha-l-antitrypsin deficiency, glycogen storage disease,
tyrosinemia, biliary atresia, Wilson disease and chronic viral hepatitis.
Fibrolamellar HCC variant is more commonly seen in patients aged 10-35 years without underlying liver
disease or elevated AFP.
Imaging is similar to adult HCC, appearing as a heterogeneous hepatic mass with early
arterial enhancement and rapid washout. Similar to hepatoblastoma, HCC also commonly
demonstrates venous invasion.
Undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma
Undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma (malignant mesenchymoma) is a highly aggressive
neoplasm, occurring in school-aged children 6-10 years old.
Unlike in hepatoblastoma and HCC, AFP is not elevated.
Imaging shows ill-defined heterogeneous mass with solid and cystic components reflecting
necrosis and hemorrhage.
Peds: 1143