Imaging modalities
Imaging options include ultrasound, four-dimensional (4D) CT, or PET.
Ultrasound is usually the first-line modality. Parathyroid adenomas appear round, well-
circumscribed, homogeneous, and hypoechoic relative to thyroid tissue. Pros of using
ultrasound are the low-cost and lack of radiation. Limitations include operator dependence,
insensitivity for detection of multigland parathyroid disease, and the inability to localize
parathyroid tissue in sonographically inaccessible locations, such as the mediastinum,
tracheoesopnagea. groove, retroesopnageal or retroclavicular locations.
4DCT consists of performing noncontrast, arterial, and delayed phases to capitalize on the
perfusion kinetics of adenomas.
Parathyroid adenomas classically are hypodense in comparison to normal thyroid tissue on noncontrast,
demonstrate enhancement, greater than thyroid on early (35 sec) arterial phase, and washout more than
thyroid in the delayed phase. However, less than half of parathyroid adenomas follow this pattern.
Large adenomas may show heterogeneous enhancement and atypical enhancement patterns.
Classic parathyroid adenoma:
Axial 4DCT shows a mass (arrows)
posterior to the left thyroid lobe
in the left paraesophageal region
which is hypodense to thyroid
on noncontrast phase, hyper-
enhancing compared to thyroid on
arterial phase.
Noncontrast CT
Arterial phase CT
Noncontrast CT
Arterial phase CT
Delayed phase CT
Atypical parathyroid adenoma: Axial 4DCT shows an oval nodule (arrows) posterior to the right thyroid lobe
which is hypodense to thyroid on noncontrast phase as well as arterial phase, and isodense to thyroid on delay
phase. This biopsy-proven parathyroid adenoma does not follow the classical enhancement pattern but is
otherwise typical in appearance with regards to morphology and location.
Greatest advantage of 4DCT is for localization of small, multinodular, and/or ectopic
adenomas including those located far-posterior to thyroid paraesophageal). However, the
greatest limitation is the high radiation exposure.
Tc-99m sestamibi is the PET tracer that is taken up by parathyroids, and is discussed in
greater detail within the "Nuclear Imaging" chapter.
MRI is occasionally used as second-line modality to identify lesions that have been
otherwise poorly localized by prior studies.
Neuro Head & Neck: 859