OVERVIEW OF ATELECTASIS
Atelectasis is loss of lung volume due to decreased aeration. Atelectasis is synonymous with
collapse. Atelectasis may be caused by bronchial obstruction, mucus plugging, or external
compression (e.g., by small lung volumes or pleural effusions).
Direct signs of atelectasis are from lobar volume loss and include:
Displacement of the fissures.
Vascular crowding.
Plate-like or triangular opacity from the collapsed
lung itself.
Indirect signs of atelectasis are due to the effect of volume loss on adjacent structures and
include:
Elevation of the diaphragm.
Overinflation of adjacent or contralateral lobes.
Rib crowding on the side with volume loss.
Hilar displacement.
Mediastinal shift to the side with volume loss.
Air bronchograms are not seen in atelectasis when the cause of the atelectasis is central
bronchial obstruction, but air bronchograms can be seen in atelectasis caused by external
compression.
Mechanisms of atelectasis
Obstructive atelectasis occurs when alveolar gas is absorbed by blood circulating through
alveolar capillaries but is not replaced by inspired air due to bronchial obstruction.
Obstructive atelectasis can cause lobar atelectasis, which is complete collapse of a lobe, discussed on the
following pages.
Obstructive atelectasis occurs more quickly when the patient is breathing supplemental oxygen since
Oxygen is absorbed from the alveoli more rapidly than nitrogen.
In children, airway obstruction is most often due to an aspirated foreign object. In contrast to adults, the
affected side becomes hyperexpanded in children due to a ball-valve effect.
Subsegmental atelectasis is a subtype of obstructive atelectasis commonly seen after surgery or general
illness, due to mucus obstruction of the small airways.
Relaxation (passive) atelectasis is caused by relaxation of lung adjacent to an intrathoracic
lesion causing mass effect, such as a pleural effusion, pneumothorax, or pulmonary mass.
Adhesive atelectasis is due to surfactant deficiency.
Adhesive atelectasis is seen most commonly in neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, but can also be
seen in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Cicatricial atelectasis is volume loss from architectural distortion of lung parenchyma by
fibrosis.
LOBAR ATELECTASIS
Lobar atelectasis is usually caused by central bronchial obstruction (obstructive atelectasis),
which may be secondary to mucus plugging or an obstructing neoplasm.
Ift the lobar atelectasis occurs acutely, mucus plugging is the most likely cause.
Mucus plugging is most common in the lower lobes, least common in the left upper lobe.
Iflobar atelectasis is seen in an outpatient, an obstructing central tumor must be ruled out.
Lobar atelectasis, or collapse of an entire lobe, has characteristic appearances depending on
which of the five lobes is collapsed, as discussed on the following pages.
Chest: 3