Triangulation (continued)
A true lateral view is helpful to triangulate a lesion seen only on the MLO view.
If the lesion rises on the lateral compared to the MLO, the lesion is located in the medial
breast (medial: muffins rise). If the lesion sinks, it is lateral (lateral: lead sinks).
Working up a mass or focal asymmetry seen on screening mammography
A screening mammogram can only receive the BI-RADS 1, 2, or 0 assessments. If screening
mammogram findings are concerning, the patient is assessed as BI-RADS 0 and is recalled
for additional evaluation.
When the patient returns for the diagnostic workup, spot compression views of the area
in question should be obtained. Altered projections or rolled views can also be used
if necessary. If additional diagnostic mammographic views show only normal pliable
fibroglandular tissue, then no further workup is needed (BI-RADS 1).
If an abnormality persists on spot compression, then it needs to be localized on two
orthogonal views. When correlating a lesion on two views, it is important to remember that
the lesion should be located at approximately the same distance (within 1 cm) from the
nipple on each view. This rule may prevent mistaken localization of different lesions on each
projection.
If the lesion is seen only on the MLO, a lateral view should be obtained to triangulate the
lesion. A lesion seen on the MLO view but not the CC view may be located far laterally. An
exaggerated CC lateral (XCCL) view can better image the far lateral tissue.
Al lesion seen only on the CC view may be in the upper-inner quadrant and not included in
the MLO view. Rolled CC views are typically performed to localize lesions seen only in the CC
view.
Once a lesion is localized to a quadrant, targeted ultrasound should be performed.
If a suspicious single-view finding still cannot be localized despite a thorough
mammographic and ultrasound evaluation, MRI can be helpful as a problem-solving tool.
Mammographic stereotactic biopsy is also an option to biopsy a one-view finding (although
stereotactic biopsy is used most commonly to biopsy calcifications).
In general, biopsy should be performed for a mass with any suspicious feature either
on ultrasound or mammography. For instance, a circumscribed mammographic mass
that has an indistinct or microlobulated margin on ultrasound is suspicious despite its
mammographic appearance.
Most new findings are suspicious, with a notable exception being a circumscribed
mammographic mass shown definitively to be a simple cyst on ultrasound.
Two years of stability is generally considered adequate to call a benign-appearing mass
benign, although some institutions advocate three years of surveillance.
Palpable mass
The mammographic workup for a palpable abnormality is similar to that of an asymptomatic
lesion found on mammography, with one key difference: In general, all palpable findings are
evaluated by ultrasound, even if the mammogram is negative.
Breast: 395