CERVICAL SPINE TRAUMA
Intervals
The basion-dental interval and atlanto-dental interval (also known as the atlanto-axial
interval) should be evaluated in every lateral cervical spine radiograph.
An increased basion-dental interval >12 mm suggests craniocervical dissociation.
An increased atlanto-dental interval >2.5 mm (some authors suggest 3 mm as a cutoff) can be seen in
ligamentous laxity and resultant subluxation.
basion-dental. interval
basion
should be <12r mm
C1
(atlas)
atlanto-dental interval
(atlanto-axial) interval)
should be <2.5 mmi in adults
dens
should be <5 mm in children
ofC2
measured at the bottom
(axis)
ofthe C1-C2 articulation
The atlanto-dental interval (ADI), also known as the atlanto-axial interval, should be <2.5 mm in adults.
Lateral cervical spine radiograph shows widening of the ADI (arrows) to >1 cm, indicative of anterior
subluxation.
The C1 vertebral body is known as the atlas (who carried the globe on his shoulders) and does not have a
body; instead it provides structural support via its lateral masses. C2 is known as the axis (allows rotation).
Note the above cutoffs were established on radiography. The normal basion-dental interval
on CT is slightly under 10 mm; the normal atlanto-dental interval on CT is 2 mm.
Lines
Every lateral cervical spine radiograph should be evaluated for continuity and smoothness of
the 4 primary osseous contours.
spinal canal
(space between
posterior vertebral line
and spinolaminar line)
-
anterior vertebral line
spinous process line
spinolaminar line
posterior vertebral line
Anterior vertebral line: Traces the anterior margin of the vertebral bodies. The prevertebral soft tissues
are located anterior to the anterior vertebral line.
Posterior vertebral line: Traces the posterior margin of the vertebral bodies and the anterior margin of
the spinal canal. The spinal canal is the space between the posterior vertebral and spinolaminar lines.
Spinolaminar line: Traces the posterior margin of the spinal canal.
Spinous process line: Traces the posterior tips of the spinous processes.
Spine: 898