ADRENAL GLANDS
ANATOMY
The adrenal glands are inverted Y-shaped endocrine glands that mediate the stress response
by releasing cortisol and catecholamines. The adrenal glands are also a site of secondary sex
hormone synthesis and blood pressure regulation (with aldosterone).
The adrenal glands have two distinct components, the cortex and medulla, with different
embryological origins (the cortex is derived from mesothelium; the medulla is derived from
neural crest). The cortex and medulla are susceptible to different diseases.
The adrenal glands are often asymmetric with the left gland thicker than the right.
Adrenal cortex
The adrenal cortex is the peripheral portion of the gland and is composed of three layers
that synthesize distinct hormones derived from cholesterol.
Zona glomerulosa (most superficial): Produces aldosterone.
Zona fasciculata: Produces glucocorticoids in response to pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
Zone reticularis (deepest; closest to the adrenal medulla): Produces androgens.
Adrenal hyperplasia, adenoma, and cortical carcinoma are lesions that can be diagnosed on
imaging.
Adrenal medulla
The medulla is the central inner portion of the adrenal gland and it is associated with
catecholamine production norepinephrine and epinephrine, derived from tyrosine).
Masses that arise in the medulla include pheochromocytomas and neuroblastic tumors
ganglioneuroma, angioneuroblastoma, and neuroblastoma). Neuroblastoma is the most
common extracranial solid tumor of childhood and is discussed in the pediatric imaging
section.
BIOCHEMICAL APPROACH TO ADRENAL LESIONS
A patient may be suspected of having a hyperfunctioning adrenal lesion, based on clinical
signs/symptoms or lab abnormalities. However, most incidental adrenal lesions are NOT
hyperfunctioning.
Adrenal hyperfunction
Cushing syndrome is caused by excess circulating cortisol by exogenous administration
or endogenous production, as the result of pituitary (Cushing disease) or from non-
pituitary disease, including idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal adenoma, or ectopic/
paraneoplastic ACTH (e.g., from small cell lung cancer).
Conn syndrome is the result of excess aldosterone production, usually from an adrenal
adenoma, resulting in hypertension and hypokalemia. Adenomas implicated in Conn
syndrome are typically small and may be difficult to detect on CT. Localizing the side of
excess hormone production with venous sampling may be a helpful diagnostic adjunct.
Adrenal cortical carcinoma is a very rare adrenal malignancy that arises from the cortex and
typically causes an increase in levels of all cortical adrenal hormones and their precursors.
Pheochromocytomas usually arise from the adrenal medulla and can be associated with
excess catecholamine production. This can result in episodic headaches, tachycardia,
diaphoresis, and uncontrolled hypertension.
GU: 233