INFECTIONS IN THE IMMUNOCOMPROMISED
Immunosuppressed patients are susceptible to the same organisms that infect
mmunocompetent patients; however, one must be aware of several additional
opportunistic organisms that may present in the mmunocompromised.
An immunocompromised patient with a focal air space opacity is most likely to have a
bacterial pneumonia (most commonly pneumococcus), but TB should also be considered if
the CD4 count is low.
In contrast, multifocal opacities have a wider differential diagnosis including Pneumocystis
pneumonia and opportunistic fungal infection such as Cryptococcus or. Aspergillus.
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
Pneumocystis. jiroveci previously called Pneumocystis carinii) is an opportunistic fungus that
may cause pneumonia in individuals with CD4 counts <200 cells/cc or other T-cell deficiency
(e.g., status post bone marrow transplant or solid organ transplant). The incidence of
Pneumocystis pneumonia is decreasing due to routine antibiotic prophylaxis.
Pneumocystis pneumonia: Radiograph (top left
image) shows multiple upper-lobe predominant
airspace opacities. CT (top image) shows crazy paving
(arrows), with confluent ground glass attenuation in
the upper lobes.
Axial CT in a different patient with Pneumocystis
pneumonia (bottom left image) shows asymmetric
ground glass opacification, with thin-walled cysts.
Cases courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Chest radiograph findings can be normal but a classic finding of Pneumocystis pneumonia is
bilateral perihilar (central) airspace opacities with peripheral sparing.
The classic CT appearance is ground glass opacification, sometimes with crazy paving
(ground glass and thickening of the interlobular septa).
A normal CT rules out Pneumocystis pneumonia; however, the disease can hide in a normal
chest radiograph.
Pneumocystis pneumonia has a propensity to cause upper lobe pneumatoceles particularly
if untreated, which may predispose to pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum.
Chest: 28