MRI-guided biopsy (continued)
MRI-guided biopsy can be performed for lesions seen only on MRI. Given that MRI-guided
biopsy is expensive and can be more uncomfortable for the patient, it is common to perform
a second-look ultrasound targeted towards the MRI abnormality SO that ultrasound-guided
biopsy might be an option. A corresponding ultrasound finding is identified in 56-57% of
cases, with masses and larger lesions being more likely to have a correlate than non-mass
enhancement and smaller lesions.
MRI-guided biopsy almost always requires intravenous gadolinium. Time is of the essence
during the procedure because the lesion must be targeted before contrast washes out or the
lesion becomes obscured by delayed parenchymal enhancement.
The grid-coordinate method allows accurate biopsy of an abnormality seen only on MRI.
This method is most analogous to a grid-based CT-guided biopsy elsewhere in the body.
With the patient lying prone, a grid is applied to either the medial or lateral breast. A lateral
approach is preferred whenever possible as it allows greater access to posterior tissues.
After initial images are obtained, the targeted lesion is localized on the grid. Local anesthesia
is administered without imaging guidance. During the biopsy, the core needle device is
inserted exactly perpendicular to the breast to a pre-measured depth, similar to stereotactic
biopsy. Multiple 9- to 11-gauge vacuum-assisted samples are obtained. Finally, a post-biopsy
marker is deployed.
PRE-OPERATIVE LESION LOCALIZATION
Radioactive seed localization
Prior to excisional biopsy or lumpectomy, pre-operative localization of a breast lesion can be
performed using an iodine-125 radioactive seed. Under either mammographic or ultrasound
guidance, the seed is placed within or next to the targeted lesion. Its position is confirmed
by orthogonal mammographic images. In the operating room, the surgeon uses a gamma
probe to detect the radioactivity prior to excision.
Radioactive seeds are increasingly utilized due to certain advantages over wire localization.
Unlike wire localization which is restricted to the day of surgery, radioactive seed can be placed up to 5
days before surgery.
There is more flexibility in approach for placement by the radiologist and choice for incision location by
the surgeon, allowing potentially better cosmesis.
Lack of external wires outside the skin surface leads to higher patient satisfaction, and less risk for wire
migration or dislodgement.
The main drawback of radioactive seeds is implementing the many safety requirements
for their use. Additionally, if a seed is naccurately positioned, it cannot be removed prior
to surgery; a second seed must be placed to localize the targeted lesion, with both seeds
removed during surgery. Radioseeds cannot currently be placed under MRI guidance as the
pre-loaded radioseed needles and gamma probes used to check for deployment are not MRI
compatible.
Wire localization
Another option for pre-operative marking of a breast lesion is wire localization. The wire can
be placed under mammographic, sonographic or MRI guidance (if an MRI compatible system
is used).
The shortest approach to the lesion should be used and an appropriate wire length should
be chosen (typically 5, 7, or 9 cm).
After the lumpectomy or excisional biopsy, specimen radiographs are obtained to confirm
that the targeted lesion and the intact hook wire are contained within the specimen.
Breast: 442