LESIONS OF UNKNOWN CELL ORIGIN
Benign: Simple bone cyst (SBC), also called unicameral bone cyst (UBC)
Solitary bone cyst: Frontal and lateral radiographs of the proximal tibia in a skeletally immature patient show a
central, expansile lesion of the proximal tibia. A pathologic fracture is present with a displaced bone fragment
(red arrows), representing thej fallen fragment sign. T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression (right image) shows
multiple fluid levels (yellow arrows). The differential diagnosis incudes an aneurysmal bone cyst.
Case courtesy Michael Callahan, MD, Boston Children's Hospital.
Simple bone cyst/unicameral bone cyst is the result of a benign local disturbance of bone
growth in children and adolescents.
The lesion is either hollow or fluid-filled and typically found in the proximal diaphysis of the
humerus or femur. Less common locations include the calcaneus or iliac bone.
SBC lacks periosteal reaction (in contrast to aneurysmal bone cyst), as long as there is no
fracture.
Up to 66% of cases are complicated by pathologic fracture. The fallen fragment sign
represents a cortical fracture fragment that has fallen into the cyst. It is pathognomonic for
SBC when seen in a young patient in a lesion in an appropriate location for SBC.
SBC is always located centrally within a bone.
Fluid-fluid levels are seen on MRI. Fluid levels are nonspecific and can also be seen in
aneurysmal bone cyst, giant cell tumor, and telangiectatic osteosarcoma.
One nonsurgical treatment option is the intra-lesional injection of methylpredhisolone,
which induces osteogenesis.
Benign: Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC)
Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is an expansile or aneurysmal" multicystic lesion seen in
children and adolescents.
Histologically, ABC is made of blood-filled sinusoids and solid fibrous elements. ABC may
arise secondarily within a pre-existing tumor. This is important to consider if an aggressive
lesion is biopsied and the pathology returns ABC, as this may imply that the true lesion was
not sampled.
Unlike SBC, ABC can be located anywhere in bone (central or eccentric). It may occur in the
posterior elements of the spine. Unlike SBC, ABC often features a "buttressing" smooth
periosteal reaction at the proximal and distal aspects. Like SBC, fluid levels are present.
Malignant: Adamantinoma
Adamantinoma is a very rare malignant lytic lesion in the tibia with a soap-bubble
appearance. It may be difficult to differentiate from fibrous dysplasia.
MSK: 958