Pilocytic astrocytoma / juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma (continued)
Pilocytic astrocytoma, often called juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma (JPA), is a WHO grade 1
astrocytic tumor. Unlike diffuse gliomas, JPAS are wel-circumscribed.
JPA typically occurs in children, as the name suggests, and is the most common benign brain
tumor of childhood.
The majority occur in the cerebellum. The second most common location of pilocytic
astrocytoma is the optic pathway/rypotnalamus, which is associated with neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1) in 1/3 of cases. Posterior fossa JPA is not associated with NF1.
Greater than 70% of cerebellar JPA carry BRAF gene fusions, an important diagnostic marker
and potential therapeutic target.
MRI typically shows a cystic mass with an avidly enhancing nodule and relatively little
edema. A minority have little to no cystic component.
A more aggressive variant is the pilomyxoid astrocytoma, which is not distinguishable on
imaging but tends to involve optic chiasm/hypothalamus in younger children and infants.
Ependymoma
Ependymoma: Precontrast T1-weighted (left image) and post-contrast T1-weighted sagittal MRI (right image)
shows a lobulated, isointense, avidly enhancing mass arising from the fourth ventricle (arrows). There is
kinking of the brainstem and obstructive hydrocephalus of the third ventricle.
Case courtesy Amir Zamani, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Ependymoma is a WHO grade 2 tumor arising from the ependymal lining of the ventricular
system and central canal of the spinal cord. A more aggressive variant is anaplastic
ependymoma (grade 3).
Benign ependymal tumors include subependymoma (discussed later in this section) and myxopapillary
ependymoma (discussed in the "Spine" chapter).
pendymoma tends to occur in the posterior fossa in children. In adults, ependymomas
occur more commonly in the spinal cord (discussed in the "Spine" chapter) and
supratentorium.
On imaging, ependymomas appear as an enhancing mass with neterogeneity related to
cystic/necrotic change, calcification, or hemorrhage.
The posterior fossa ependymoma has been called the toothpaste or plastic tumor for its
propensity to fill the fourth ventricle and squeeze through the foramina of Magendie or
Luschka into the adjacent basal cisterns.
In contrast, medulloblastoma, which can also fill the fourth ventricle, does not typically squeeze through
the foramina.
Neuro Brain: 716