RADIONUCLIDE IMAGING OF CARDIAC FUNCTION
Gated SPECT (GSPECT)
As described earlier in the chapter, GSPECT using TC-99m-labeled perfusion agents (e.g.,
sestamibi) is most commonly performed for evaluation of ventricular function.
First-pass radionuclide angiography (FP-RNA)
TC-99m-labeled red blood cells (RBCs) are injected intravenously and dynamic imaging is
performed during the rapid initial transit of radiotracer through the heart, great vessels, and
lungs. The study can be done at both rest and during stress. This study is no longer used in
clinical practice.
Data can be processed for visual and quantitative assessment of ventricular wall motion,
ejection fraction (EF), and left-to-right intracardiac shunts.
FP-RNA is more accurate than E-RNA (below) for evaluation of right ventricular EF. It is not
sensitive for right-to-left intracardiac shunts, which can be better detected on a pulmonary
perfusion scan with Tc-99m MAA (discussed under "Nuclear Imaging" chapter).
Equilibrium radionuclide angiography (E-RNA)
EDI Frame
ES Frame
EF Image
Stroke VolumeMUGA scan: Representative planar images for calculation of LVEF and stroke volume.
This is also known as gated blood pool ventriculography or multi-gated acquisition (MUGA)
scan. ECG-gated planar blood pool images of the heart are obtained after injected Tc-
99m RBCS have achieved equilibrium in the intravascular space. In vitro labeling of RBCs is
preferred. E-RNA can also be performed with SPECT (SPECT-E-RNA).
E-RNA allows visual evaluation of cardiac size, shape, and wall motion, as well as functional
analysis of ventricular performance.
LVEF = (end diastolic counts - end systolic counts) / (end diastolic counts - background counts)
The calculated LVEF can be falsely elevated if the selected background region of interest includes part of
the left atrium (in case of left atrial enlargement) or extracardiac activity (e.g., spleen).
E-RNA is comparable to FP-RNA for measurement of LVEF. However, it has been largely
replaced by the more available echocardiography and GSPECT perfusion imaging.
Cardiac: 497