Le Fort fractures (continued)
Le Fort midfacial fractures detach the involved maxillary occlusion-bearing segment (palate,
alveolus, and maxillary teeth) from the skull base pterygomaxillary disjunction).
All Le Fort fractures involve the pterygoid plates of the sphenoid bone and maxillary sinus
walls. Le Fort fractures are classified by the anterosuperior course of the fracture lines,
which can occur alone or in combination on each side of the face (see illustration above).
Displaced Le Fort fractures at any level can result in malocclusion or midfacial deformity.
Associated palatal fractures are common and contribute to malocclusion.
The non-occlusion-related components of the upper level Le Fort fractures can be treated
as combinations of naso-orbito-ethmoid, ygomaticomaxllary complex, and/or orbital
fractures. However, the reporting of Le Fort II and III fractures remains relevant as they
are included among the Denver screening criteria for blunt cerebrovascular injury, which
warrants CTA of the neck arteries and circle of Willis.
ygomaticomoxilary complex fractures
zygomaticofrontal suture
zygomaticotemporal suture
zygomaticosphenoid suture
zygomaticomaxllary suture
A complete ygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fracture liberates a tetrapod fragment via
suture diastasis or fracture near the 4 articulations of the zygoma:
Zygomaticofrontal. suture: along lateral orbital rim.
ygomaticomaxilary buttress: from inferior orbital rim and floor through maxillary sinus walls.
ygomaticotemporal suture: along zygomatic arch.
ygomaticosphenoid suture: along lateral orbital wall.
Also possible are incomplete fractures that involve an isolated limb of the ZMC, such as the
zygomatic arch, lateral orbital rim/wall, or inferior orbital rim.
The appearance of the ygomaticosphenoid suture (e.g., displacement, angulation,
telescoping) is a sensitive landmark for evaluating overall ZMC alignment.
Displacement or malalignment of ZMC fractures disrupt facial profile and width.
Because the orbital floor is involved in classic ZMC fractures, they are sometimes called
orbitozygomatic fractures. As with other internal orbital fractures, ZMC fractures with
significant orbital volume expansion can cause late enophthalmos.
Neuro Head & Neck: 787