INDICATIONS FOR BREAST MRI
Screening for breast cancer in women at increased risk
Screening for cancer in high-risk patients is an accepted indication for breast MRI. High risk
is defined as a 20% or greater lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. There are several
models for risk prediction taking into account family history, gene mutations, and exposures
such as thoracic radiation (typically administered for treatment of lymphoma). BRCA1 or
BRCA2 gene mutation carriers (or untested first-degree relatives of a confirmed carrier) are
high risk, with 50-85% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer.
MRI has been shown to detect occult breast cancer in 2-5% of high-risk women.
Staging of known cancer
In patients with an established diagnosis of breast cancer, MRI can be helpful to evaluate the
extent of disease and can change clinical management.
The presence of two or more sites of cancer in one quadrant (multifocal disease) may
preclude breast conservation, depending on the size of the breast. MRI has been reported to
find additional cancer in the same quadrant in 1-20% of women.
The presence of cancer in more than one quadrant (multicentric disease) usually requires
mastectomy. Unsuspected multicentric disease was found by MRI in 2-24% of women.
MRI can accurately measure tumor size and has the highest correlation with pathology
specimens when compared to ultrasound or mammography, which tend to underestimate
the true size.
MRI can assess for the presence of enlarged or abnormal axillary lymph nodes.
MRI can evaluate for pectoralis or intercostal muscle invasion.
Pectoralis muscle invasion: Axial (left image) and sagittal contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed MRI shows
an ill-defined enhancing mass (yellow arrows) in the far posterior breast with loss of normal fat plane
separating the posterior fibroglandular tissue from the pectoralis muscle. There is associated abnormal
enhancement of the pectoralis muscle itself (red arrows).
Evaluation for recurrent or residual disease
Breast conservation therapy combines lumpectomy with radiation therapy and is the
treatment of choice for most early stage breast cancers. If resection margins after
lumpectomy pathologically show remaining tumor, MRI can evaluate for the extent of
residual disease, which may manifest as small nodular areas of enhancement around the
lumpectomy site.
Normal enhancement following lumpectomy can be seen for up to 18 months due to
granulation tissue. Suspicious features include enhancement beyond 18 months or new
enhancement after the initial post-operative enhancement has subsided.
Breast: 404