Radionuclide cystography (RNC)
Radionuclide cystography is the most sensitive test for evaluation of reflux in pediatric
population with less radiation exposure compared to voiding cystourethrography (VCUG).
The radiotracer chosen is variable. Tc-99m pertechnetate, Tc-99m DTPA, and Tc-99m sulfur
colloid can all work well. Regardless of the radiotracer chosen, it is injected retrograde into
the catheterized bladder.
Grading of reflux:
Minimal (RNC grade I): Reflux is confined to the ureter.
Moderate (RNC grade II): Reflux extends superiorly to the pelvicalyceal system.
Severe (RNC grade III): Severe reflux causing a tortuous ureter and/or dilated intrarenal system.
Renal transplant evaluation
While transplanted kidneys are often initially evaluated by ultrasound and ultimately by
biopsy, radionuclide renogram using Tc-99m MAG3 or DTPA is an important diagnostic tool.
A normal renal transplant should be visualized on the flow phase within seconds after the
iliac vessels. Its cortical and clearance phases are similar to those of a native kidney.
Renogram findings of common transplant complications include:
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) occurs within 3-4 days after surgery and results from perioperative
ischemia. Its renogram is characterized by normal perfusion, but poor renal function with increased
cortical retention, delayed clearance and decreased urine excretion.
Hyperacute rejection produces immediate vascular thrombosis in the transplanted kidney, resulting in
absent perfusion, markedly reduced or absent function.
Acute rejection occurs within weeks to three months after surgery. It presents as decreased perfusion
and marked cortical retention.
Chronic rejection occurs months to years after surgery. It is characterized by progressive worsening
perfusion and function with cortical thinning, pelvicalyceal dilation.
Cyclosporin nephrotoxicity appears similar to ATN, but occurs at a later time after ATN should have
resolved.
Urine leak presents as progressive accumulation of activity outside the urinary tract.
Urinoma, hematoma and lymphocele may present as fixed perirenal photopenic areas.
Nucs: 480