VASCULAR WHITE MATTER DISEASE
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES)
PRES: Axial FLAIR images show abnormal hyperintense signal in the subcortical white matter of the bilateral
posterior frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, as well as bilateral cerebellar hemispheres.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is a disorder of vasogenic edema
with a posterior circulation predominance triggered by failed autoregulation and resultant
hyperperfusion, most commonly caused by acute hypertension. In addition to hypertension,
PRES is also associated with eclampsia, sepsis, autoimmune disorders, multi-drug
chemotherapy, and solid or stem cell transplantation.
In contrast to infarction, the edema is vasogenic in etiology, not cytotoxic. Diffusion may be
normal, increased, or restricted.
Imaging shows symmetric regions of subcortical white matter abnormality hypoattenuation
on CT and T2 prolongation on MR), especially in the posterior circulation (occipital and
parietal lobes and posterior fossa). Mild mass effect and enhancement can be seen.
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and eukoentephalopathy (CADASIL)
CADASIL is an inherited disease (notch3 mutation) characterized by recurrent stroke,
migraine, subcortical dementia, and pseudobulbar palsy, due to small vessel arteriopathy.
The clinical hallmark of CADASIL is recurrent episodes of stroke or transient ischemic attacks,
which are nearly always found to be subcortical in the white matter or basal ganglia on
imaging. There is often associated migraine. It may eventually lead to dementia.
MRI shows symmetric foci of T2 prolongation in the subcortical white matter, which may
become confluent as the disease progresses. Anterior temporal lobe or paramedian frontal
lobe foci of T2 prolongation are highly sensitive and specific for CADASIL, especially with
clinical history of migraine. Although the symmetric subcortical pattern is similar to PRES,
the distribution in CADASIL is anterior circulation.
Vasculitis
CNS vasculitis is a group of vascular inflammatory disorders that primarily affect the small
vessels, in particular the leptomeningeal and small parenchymal vessels.
Etiologies include lupus, polyarteritis nodosa, giant cell arteritis, and Sjogren syndrome.
MRI shows numerous small focal areas of T2 prolongation in subcortical and deep white
matter. Although the appearance may be similar to MS, foci of hemorrhage (best seen on
GRE or SWI) may be present in vasculitis, which would not be seen in MS.
Vascular imaging (CT angiography and catheter angiography are more sensitive than MRI
angiography) shows a beaded, irregular appearance to the cerebral vessels.
Neuro Brain: 734