RENAL TRAUMA
Organ Injury Scale (0IS) - American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST)
The OIS scale from the AAST is the most commonly used system for classifying renal trauma.
It was initially a surgical classification, but now encompasses findings from CT imaging,
operative report, and pathology. The highest injury among the three is assigned the final
AAST grade. The OIS was updated in 2018 to include vascular injuries.
Grade :: by far the most common type of renal injury (95%) and describes a renal contusion
or subcapsular hematoma. Treatment is conservative.
Grade I: superficial laceration (s1 cm) or perinephric hematoma confined to Gerota's fascia,
without urinary extravasation. Treatment is conservative.
Grade II: deeper laceration (>1 cm), without urinary extravasation; any injury in the
presence of renal vascular injury or active bleeding contained within Gerota's fascia.
Treatment is typically conservative.
A potential pitfall of a grade III injury is that a clot at the collecting system may prevent urinary
extravasation initially, but urinary extravasation may occur later as the clot lyses from urinary urokinase.
Grade IV: deep laceration which extends into the collecting system (causing urinary
extravasation), renal pelvis laceration or complete disruption of the ureteropelvic junction,
segmental renal artery/vein injury, vascular thrombosis resulting in segmental or complete
kidney infarction, or active bleeding beyond Gerota's fascia. Vascular grade IV injury can be
treated with endovascular embolization or stenting.
Grade V: most severe injury and includes main renal artery/vein laceration or avulsion of
the renal hilum, devascularized kidney with active bleeding, or shattered kidney. Treatment
is variable but typically surgical.
CT description of renal trauma
Renal vascular injury described in the 2018 OIS update is defined as renal artery
pseudoaneurysm or arteriovenous (AV) fistula. Both appear on imaging as a
hyperattenuating focus with density similar to the aorta, that decreases in attenuation on
delayed phase.
In contrast, active bleeding appears as focal or diffuse vascular contrast that increases in
attenuation and/or size with delayed phase imaging.
Traumatic renal artery thrombosis occurs with tearing of the intima, initiating thrombosis.
There is permanent loss of renal function after approximately two hours of ischemia.
Axial unenhanced CT demonstrates a hyperdense
Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows AAST grade III renal
subcapsular renal hematoma on the right. This is
injury with deep laceration, subcapsular and perirenal
considered AAST grade li injury.
hematoma. There is no injury to the collecting system.
GU: 249