Polyhydramnios
Polyhydramnios is too much amniotic fluid.
Greater than half of cases of polyhydramnios are idiopathic, with a normal fetus. The
remainder may be associated with chromosomal abnormalities, diabetes, or structural
defects (primarily of the gastrointestinal tract), including:
Primary upper GI obstruction or atresia, such as laryngeal, esophageal or duodenal atresia.
Secondary obstruction, due to diaphragmatic hernia, gastroschisis, or omphalocele.
Severe CNS anomalies (which often cause disorders in swallowing).
Monochorionic twin syndromes, such as twin-twin transfusion syndrome (one twin polyhydramnios and
one twin oligohydramnios).
Placental abnormalities, such as chorioangioma.
PLACENTA
Placental embryology, physiology, and morphology
The placenta is formed by fetal chorion and maternal decidualized endometrium.
The mature placental circulation allows exchange of Oxygen and nutrients between maternal
and fetal vessels through a membrane, although the blood does not admix.
Placental location should be accessed in every patient.
A succenturiate lobe is an island of placental tissue separate from the main placenta,
connected to the main placenta by blood vessels. Patients with succenturiate lobe have an
increased incidence of velamentous cord insertion and retained products of conception.
Placenta previa
Placental position is assessed starting in the second trimester. If there is uncertainty
about placental position with relationship to the cervix, transvaginal evaluation should be
performed.
Normal placental position is greater than 2 cm from the internal OS.
Low-lying placenta is <2 cm from the internal OS. Majority of low-lying placentas will resolve
by the third trimester due to placental migration.
In placenta previa, the placenta covers the internal cervical OS. Patients typically
present with painless vaginal bleeding in the second trimester. Placenta previa is seen in
approximately 0.5-1% of deliveries and requires a Caesarean section for safe delivery.
A potential pitfall is over-diagnosis in the second trimester due to uterine contractions or overfilling of the
maternal bladder.
Placental abruption
Placental abruption is premature separation of the placenta from its uterine attachment.
Patients most commonly present with pain. On physical exam, blood may be present in the
vaginal canal.
There is an increased incidence of abruption in maternal hypertension, drug abuse, trauma,
or rapid decompression of a distended uterus (e.g., from a large-volume amniocentesis).
Placental abruption can have variable ultrasound findings and may appear normal.
Therefore, a negative ultrasound cannot exclude abruption. When visible, ultrasound shows
a hematoma, which can be subchorionic (most commonly), retroplacental, or pre-placental.
Obstetrics: 344