INTRADURAL EXTRAMEDULLARY LESIONS
Overview of intradural extramedullary lesions
sagittal schematic
axial schematic
Intradural extramedullary lesions are located
within the dura but outside the spinal cord,
usually involving the nerve roots or meninges
and projecting into the subarachnoid space. A
subset of this category are lesions of the conus
medullaris, cauda equina, and filum terminale,
which have a distinct differential diagnosis.
Intradural extramedullary lesions may deviate/
compress the spinal cord. CSF is seen above and
cleft
below the lesion, as well as possibly as a cleft
ofCSF
between the lesion and the cord.
Nerve sheath tumors neurofibromas and schwannomas) and meningiomas comprise 90%
of intradural extramedullary neoplasms, although which is the single most common tumor
varies by source. Leptomeningeal metastases are less common.
Myxopapillary ependymomas are the most common tumor in the cauda equina region.
Spinal paragangliomas are less common but also almost always arise in this region.
intraduralextramedulay mass: Sagittal T2-weighted (left image) and axial T1-weighted post-contrast (right image)
MRI shows an intradural thoracic mass (arrows). The mass is distinct from the spinal cord and displaces the cord
posteriorly. The axial image shows severe posterior compression of the cord (arrow) by the avidly enhancing mass.
This was a meningioma. Usually, however, thoracic meningiomas are posterior to the spinal cord.
INTRADURAL EXTRAMEDULLARY SPINAL NEOPLASMS
Meningioma
Typical meningiomas are benign (WHO grade I) intradural extramedullary neoplasms. More
aggressive variants (WHO grade II and III) are less common. Less than 10% are extradural, or
both intradural and extradural.
Spinal meningiomas are most commonly seen in older women. Radiation exposure is an
additional risk factor.
Meningiomas are associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2), especially in children or if
multiple.
Imaging classically shows an intensely enhancing mass with a dural tail. Calcification is
uncommon. The thoracic region is most commonly involved.
Spine: 871