DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS (DVT)
Overview of the deep venous thrombosis (DVT) examination
Al lower extremity venous ultrasound exam should include venous compression, color and
spectral Doppler, and evaluation of venous augmentation and respiratory variation.
Augmentation is the normal change in waveform when the calfi is compressed. Lack of augmentation
suggests a distal venous obstruction between the calf and the transducer.
Respiratory' variation is the normal change in waveform when the patient inspires. Lack of respiratory
variation suggests a proximal venous obstruction.
The popliteal, femoral, proximal deep femoral, and common femoral (including the
saphenofemoral junction) veins should be imaged every 2-3 cm with and without
compression.
Venous compression
The hallmark sonographic finding of a DVT is a noncompressible vein with or without
an intraluminal clot. A partially thrombosed vein may be partially compressible, while a
completely thrombosed vein will not be compressible at all.
Color Doppler
Color Doppler is almost always used to help localize the veins, but it is not necessary for
diagnosing DVT.
Normal color Doppler flow in a noncompressible vein is suspicious for nonobstructing
thrombus.
Acute versus chronic deep venous thrombosis
While the diagnosis of DVT is usually straightforward, distinguishing between acute and
chronic thrombus can be difficult. Evaluation of the clot's echogenicity is not a reliable way
to determine the acuity of the clot as artifactual echoes within the vein lumen can overlap
with the clot.
Sonographic findings of chronic venous thrombus include clot retraction and poor
visualization of the clot, only partial compressibility, irregularly echogenic and thickened
vein walls, and prominent collateral veins.
AORTIC DISEASE
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Screening ultrasound is performed for patients
aged 65 years or older, or 50 years or older with
a positive family history or personal history of
aortic or peripheral vascular aneurysm.
Transverse and longitudinal images of the
proximal, mid and distal aorta and common iliac
arteries are obtained.
Color Doppler images and/or spectral Doppler
with waveform analysis help to confirm
patency, detect presence of intraluminal
thrombus, and document endoleaks.
-
Dist = 5.56cm
Transverse grayscale ultrasound of the infrarenal
abdominal aorta shows an aortic aneurysm
measuring 5.6 cm in diameter (calipers), with
extensive mural thrombus (arrows).
Vascular: 587