CEREBROVASCULAR
RADIOTRACERS
Tc-99m DTPA / Te-99m pertechnetate
Technetium-99m has a half-life of 6 hours and is used in the majority of nuclear imaging.
Tc-99m DTPA and pertechnetate are transient perfusion agents. There is no uptake within
the brain parenchyma as they do not cross intact blood-brain barrier. Activity is seen in the
scalp, calvarium, subarachnoid spaces, major cerebral arteries and venous sinuses.
Transient perfusion agents are reserved for planar imaging only and are now uncommonly
used.
Tc-99m HMPAO / Tc-99m ECD
Both HMPAO and ECD are lipophilic perfusion agents that cross the blood-brain barrier. To
be retained in the cell, ECD is enzymatically modified. In contrast, HMPAO simply needs to
be protonated to be trapped. Thus, ECD is only taken up by living cells while HMPAO uptake
is a marker of perfusion. In the evaluation of subacute infarct, the phenomenon of luxury
perfusion can cause HMPAO uptake to increase (due to increased perfusion), while ECD will
show the true defect representing the infarct core.
HMPAO and ECD show activity in the brain parenchyma, mainly gray matter.
Oft these two agents, ECD is generally preferred for brain imaging, because it has more rapid
blood pool clearance, better shelf life, more accurate characterization of perfusion, and is
only taken up by living cells.
Both tracers are used for SPECT imaging.
lodine-123 ioflupane (I-123 FP-CIT or DaTscan)
lodine-123 has a half-life of 13 hours. I-123 ioflupane is a cocaine analog that binds to the
presynaptic dopamine transporter (DaT). It is used in SPECT imaging for the differentiation
of essential tremor from parkinsonism.
Thallium-201
Thallium-201 has a half-life of 73 hours and is used for SPECT imaging in the differentiation
of tumor recurrence versus radiation necrosis. Thallium accumulates in viable tumor but not
normal brain tissue.
PET agents
F-18 FDG is the most common FDA-approved PET agent used for brain imaging.
F-18 florbetapir, F-18 florbetaben and F-18 flutemetamol are FDA-approved PET agents for
imaging of beta-amyloid.
In 2020, F-18 flortaucipir was approved by FDA for tau imaging.
Other PET radiotracers are emerging that target specific neuroreceptors (such as F-18-DOPA
targeting the dopamine transporter).
RADIONUCLIDE IMAGING OF THE BRAIN
Evaluation of cerebral perfusion
Cerebral perfusion reserve can be assessed with an açetazolamide (Diamox) challenge.
Normally, cerebral blood flow increases after administration of 1 g Diamox, a carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor that causes increased cerebral CO2 concentration and thereby
cerebrovascular vasodilation.
Nucs: 452