HEPATOBILIARY INTERVENTIONS
CHRONIC LIVER DISEASE AND CIRRHOSIS
The classic angiographic finding of liver cirrhosis is corkscrew appearance of the hepatic
artery branches.
Al hypervascular mass in a cirrhotic liver may represent hepatocellular carcinoma.
Parenchymal liver biopsy can give useful prognostic information based on the grade of
hepatic fibrosis in the setting of cirrhosis, hepatitis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD),
and primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). Results may initiate treatment of chronic hepatitis, assess
response to therapy, and help predict relapse in autoimmune hepatitis.
Typically, ultrasound-guided biopsy of the left or right lobe is performed in the most
peripheral aspect to ensure that no major vessels, dilated bile ducts or gallbladder are in the
path of the biopsy needle.
BILIARY DISEASE
Biliary intervention overview and technique
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) is the injection of contrast into the biliary
tree through a percutaneous approach, traversing the hepatic parenchyma.
The two most common indications for PTC are relief of biliary obstruction and to provide
biliary diversion in the case of ductal injury, which may be post-traumatic or postsurgical.
Less common indications include percutaneous treatment of biliary calculi (endoscopic treatment is much
more common) and adjunctive pre-surgical treatment prior to a biliary anastomosis. A biliary anastomosis
is technically facilitated by having a pre-placed catheter to sew around.
Pre-procedure prophylactic antibiotics are administered, as biliary stasis predisposes to
bacterial overgrowth. Gram-negative coverage is needed, typically with levofloxacin.
The right and left biliary trees are accessed using slightly different techniques.
The right biliary tree is accessed via a right midaxillary line two-puncture approach.
The needle should be inserted directly over the ribs, as the neurovascular bundle runs
underneath each rib.
A 22-gauge needle is inserted, parallel to the table and to the inferior border of the liver.
Contrast is injected as the needle is withdrawn in an attempt to opacify the biliary tree.
Once a bile duct is opacified, the needlei is temporarily left in place and a second puncture is made with a
21-gauge needle as low as possible to access the duct.
Once the second needle has accessed a duct, a 0.018" wire is advanced, exchanged for a 5 or 6 Fr sheath,
and subsequently a hydrophilic wire (such as a Roadrunner or Glidewire) is guided into the small bowel.
The hydrophilic wire is exchanged for a stiff wire (e.g., Amplatz) and the biliary drain is placed.
Extra sideholes may be manually cut, if necessary, to allow sideholes to extend from the biliary puncture
site to the bowel.
The role of regular flushing is controversial. Some institutions advocate regular forward flushing, while
others do not routinely flush. Regardless, a biliary drain should never be aspirated, as aspiration could
draw up bowel contents into the biliary system and risk the development of cholangitis.
Three-month preventative maintenance is recommended.
The left biliary tree is accessed by a left subxiphoid approach, in a similar manner to the
right side; however, ultrasound can often visualize dilated ducts, obviating the need for two
punctures.
IR: 629