Duplicated IVC (continued)
If pre-procedural imaging is not available, a clue to the presence of a duplicated IVC on
initial cavography is the absence of iliac vein influx contralateral to the side injected.
Duplicated IVC: Pre-procedure contrast-
enhanced CT (left image) shows
duplicated IVCs on either side of the
aorta (arrows).
Case courtesy Alisa Suzuki Han, MD,
Brigham and Women's Hospital.
IVC imaging pitfalls
Pseudolipoma is a common mimic of pathology at the level of the diaphragm due to volume-
averaging artifact from prominent pericaval fat above the caudate lobe. Pseudolipoma can
be prominent in patients with cirrhosis.
Admixture artifact occurs wherever contrast-enhanced blood mixes with non-opacified
blood, for example retrograde flow in the setting of right heart failure, contrast injection
faster than 3 mL/sec, and at the level of the renal veins when contrast-enhanced blood from
the kidneys mixes with non-opacified blood from the lower extremities.
RENAL VEINS
Nutcracker syndrome
Nutcracker syndrome is compression of the left renal vein between the aorta and the SMA.
This is similar to SMA syndrome, but the renal vein is compressed instead of the duodenum.
A posterior variant, called posterior nutcracker, is the compression of a retroaortic (or
circumaortic) renal vein between the aorta and the vertebral body.
Nutcracker syndrome can present with variable clinical symptoms including pain, hematuria,
orthostatic proteinuria, pelvic congestion, and varicocele (in a male).
If patient is asymptomatic, this is called Nutcracker phenomenon.
Ultrasound, CTA or MRA can be utilized to assess the aortic-SMA angle, renal vein stenosis
and upstream dilation, prominent collateral pathway particularly through the left gonadal
vein. Narrowing of the vein only can be altered based on patient's intravascular volume
status, therefore, other findings should be included in the interpretation.
Treatment depends on the symptoms. The majority of cases of hematuria resolve within two
years of observation. If treatment is desired, angioplasty and stenting of the renal vein can
be performed.
Nutcracker syndrome:
Illustration demonstrating compression of the
SMA
renal vein (blue) between the aorta and the
compresses
SMA (red).
left renal vein
A
Vascular: 572