OSTEOCHONDROSES
The osteochondroses are a heterogeneous group of disorders that were at one point
thought to be initiated by avascular necrosis. The current understanding is that most of
these disorders are secondary to trauma. While many are associated with AVN, it is not
thought to be the initiating factor. Most are more common in males.
Blount disease
Blount disease is an
osteochondrosis of the proximal
Infantile Blount
tibial metaphysis, causing tibia
disease:
varus (bowing) and internal
Bilateral Blount
rotation, which eventually
disease with
leads to progressive deformity,
sloping of
gait deviations, and leg-length
the medial
portions of the
discrepancy.
proximal tibial
The infantile form of Blount disease
metaphyses
is thought to be due to early
(arrows),
walking and obesity, and is typically
causing tibia
varus.
bilateral.
The adolescent form is seen in
children over 6 years old and isusually unilateral.
Madelung deformity
Madelung deformity is medial sloping of the distal radius caused by dysplasia of the medial
distal radial physis and resultant growth disturbance.
Panner disease
Panner disease is osteochondrosis of the capitellum.
Little league elbow
Little league elbow is osteochondrosis of the medial epicondyle.
Scheuermann kyphosis
Scheuermann kyphosis is a syndrome of avascular necrosis of multiple thoracic vertebral
bodies leading to multiple compression fractures.
legg-Calve-Perthes disease
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease is osteochondrosis of the capital femoral epiphysis.
Kienbock disease
Kienbock disease is osteochondrosis of the carpal lunate.
Osgood-Schlatter disease
Osgood-Schlatter disease is osteochondrosis of the tibial tuberosity.
Freiberg infraction
Freiberg infraction is osteochondrosis of the second metatarsal head.
Kohler disease
Kohler disease is a self-limited osteochondrosis of the navicular bone.
Sever disease
Sever disease is calcaneal apophysitis (rather than an osteochondrosis) and is a cause of heel
pain. Sclerosis of the calcaneal apophysis is nonspecific and can be seen in asymptomatic
children, although greater fragmentation of the apophysis may be associated with pain.
Peds: 1180