DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO A RENAL MASS
Ultrasound of a renal mass
Ultrasound is particularly useful for the initial evaluation ofa cystic renal mass.
Color Doppler should be utilized to evaluate for internal blood flow. Color Doppler is also
useful to distinguish a cystic mass from a renal artery aneurysm since they appear similar in
grayscale.
CT of a renal mass
CT is useful for the evaluation of both cystic and solid renal masses.
A renal mass protocol CT consists of at least three CT phases, each providing different types
of information to aid in evaluation.
Unenhanced phase: quantify baseline attenuation and evaluate for intralesional fat and
calcifications.
Nephrographic phase (100 second delay): evaluate for enhancement by comparing to the
unenhanced images.
Excretory phase (8 minute delay): helpful to show the relationship of a renal mass to the
collection system for surgical planning, and to diagnose mimics of cystic renal masses.
The delayed excretory phase can distinguish between hydronephrosis (will show dense opacification in the
pyelographic phase) versus renal sinus cysts (will not opacify).
Reflux nephropathy may cause a dilated calyx that can simulate a cystic renal mass on the nephrographic
phase. The excretory phase would show opacification of the dilated calyx.
The excretory phase is also useful to demonstrate a calyceal diverticulum.
Although not done routinely, an arterial phase can be performed for presurgical planning.
MRI of a renal mass
MRI is particularly useful for the evaluation of solid renal masses. MRI can provide
information about internal fat and fluid content, as well as enhancement. Further details are
provided in the solid renal mass section.
MRI plays a limited role in the evaluation of a cystic renal mass. However, given the
increased general use of MRI, the new 2019 Bosniak Classification formally incorporates MRI
into its classification. This is discussed further below.
Calcifications are harder to detect with MRI.
Evaluating enhancement of a renal mass (CT and MRI)
The presence of enhancement is the most important characteristic to diagnose a solid renal
mass, but intralesional fat is almost always diagnostic of benign angiomyolipoma. A non-
fat-containing renal mass can still be benign, particularly when small (<1 cm), but the risk of
malignancy increases with increasing mass size (>3 cm).
On CT, enhancement is quantified as the absolute increase in Hounsfield units on
postcontrast images, compared to pre-contrast:
<10 HU: No enhancement.
10-19 HU: Equivocal enhancement. 220 HU: Definite enhancement.
On MRI, enhancement is quantified as the percent increase in signal intensity as measured
on postcontrast images:
<15%: No enhancement.
15-19%: Equivocal enhancement.
220%: Definite enhancement.
Lesions are considered "too small to characterize" if the lesion diameter is smaller than
twice the slice thickness. For instance, using 3 mm slices, a lesion less than 6 mm cannot be
accurately characterized based on attenuation or enhancement.
GU: 256