Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN; continued)
The Fukuoka consensus guidelines (2017) for IPMNS and MCNS recommend imaging with CT
or MRI for cysts greater than 5 mm. Further evaluation with either endoscopic ultrasound
(EUS) or resection is recommended based on the following imaging features:
Worrisome features (should be evaluated by EUS)
Cyst >3 cm
Enhancing mural nodule <5 mm
Thickened enhanced cyst walls
MPD 5-9 mm
Abrupt change in the MPD caliber with distal parenchymal atrophy
Lymphadenopathy
Elevated CA 19-9
Rapid rate of cyst growth >5 mm over two years
High-risk stigmata (should undergo resection without further testing)
Obstructive jaundice
Enhancing mural nodule >5 mm
MPD 210 mm
PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE NEOPLASMS
Overview
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors may be hyperfunctioning or non-hypertunctioning:
ypertunctioning tumors come to clinical attention due to symptoms of endocrine excess.
Non-hyperfunctioning tumors tend to be larger at diagnosis. These tumors may undergo
cystic change and should be considered in the differential of a cystic pancreatic neoplasm.
There is often central necrosis and calcification in these large tumors as well.
Pancreatic endocrine tumors tend to be hypervascular and are best seen in the late arterial
phase. Most are solid unless very large in size. A hypervascular liver mass with an associated
pancreatic mass is most likely a metastatic lesion from a pancreatic endocrine neoplasm.
Insulinoma
Insulinoma is the most common pancreatic endocrine tumor. Due to symptoms of
hypoglycemia, insulinomas tend to present early and have the best prognosis of all
neuroendocrine tumors with only 10% demonstrating malignant behavior.
The Whipple triad describes the clinical symptoms of insulinoma: Hypoglycemia, clinical
symptoms of hypoglycemia, and alleviation of symptoms after administration of glucose.
Gastrinoma
Gastrinoma is the second most common pancreatic endocrine tumor. Liver metastases are
present at the time of diagnosis in 60% of patients.
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a clinical syndrome that occurs secondary to a gastrinoma.
Hypersecretion of gastrin leads to gastritis, diarrhea, peptic ulcer disease and even
gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Gastrinoma is associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1 and in this case
tends to be multiple and located in the duodenum rather than the pancreas.
GI: 159