Idiopathic granulomatous mastitis
Idiopathic granulomatous mastitis is a rare cause of breast inflammation that is more
common in young reproductive age women who have previously lactated. Hormonal
influences are felt to likely contribute. Although no infectious etiology is identified in many
cases, a certain subset is felt to be due to indolent infection with Corynebacterium species.
Granulomatous mastitis usually presents as one or more painful palpable breast masses.
There may be associated skin erythema or nipple discharge.
Mammography most often shows focal asymmetry or an irregular mass.
On ultrasound there is usually an irregular mass or confluent masses with parallel
orientation and hypoechoic or heterogeneous echotexture. In longstanding cases, fluid
collections may be present.
Granulomatous mastitis shows enhancement on MRI and may present as segmental
distribution NME.
The imaging features of granulomatous mastitis may mimic breast cancer and biopsy is
usually warranted. Treatment of idiopathic granulomatous mastitis can be challenging, and
symptoms may be longstanding.
Periductal mastitis
Periductal mastitis, also known as plasma cell mastitis, is caused by the irritating contents
of intraductal lipids. It is seen in post-menopausal women and produces the classic
mammographic appearance of large, rod-like secretory calcifications.
Diabetic mastopathy
Targeted ultrasound of bilateral breasts in a patient with type 1 diabetes who presented with palpable
bilateral subareolar masses. Images show irregular hypoechoic masses with posterior shadowing in the
bilateral subareolar regions. Given similar appearances and patient history, these masses may represent
diabetic mastopathy, however malignancy must be excluded. Patient underwent core needle biopsy of the
right breast mass which confirmed diabetic mastopathy.
Diabetic mastopathy is a sequela of long-term insulin-dependent diabetes. An autoimmune
reaction to matrix proteins from chronic hyperglycemia causes a firm and sometimes painful
mass.
On mammography, diabetic mastopathy can appear as an ill-defined, asymmetric density
without microcalcifications or as architectural distortion.
Ultrasound typically shows a hypoechoic mass or regional acoustic shadowing, mimicking
the appearance of a scirrhous breast cancer.
Because the mammographic and sonographic appearance can mimic breast cancer, core
biopsy is required.
Breast: 429