Primary CNS lymphoma: Immunocompetent patient (continued)
In an immunocompetent patient, PCNSL typically presents as an homogeneously enhancing
mass.
Involvement of the frontal lobes and basal ganglia is most common, but it can be centered
also in the brainstem and cerebellum. Transcallosal infiltration can occur, which is called a
butterfly lesion.
The differential diagnosis for a mass involving the corpus callosum includes lymphoma, glioblastoma, and
demyelinating lesion.
Primary CNS lymphoma: mmunocompromised patient
munodeiduen/related CNS lymphoma is associated with EBV infection.
In an immunocompromised patient, PCNSL typically presents as an irregular, ring-enhancing
lesion. The ring enhancement is caused by central necrosis.
The most common causes of ring-enhancing brain masses in patients with HIV/AIDS are
lymphoma and toxoplasmosis. These lesions are usually multiple, although a single large
lesion is more likely to represent lymphoma. Several clinical and imaging options are
available to differentiate between lymphoma and toxoplasmosis:
Empirical anti-toxoplasmosis therapy and short-interval follow-up imaging.
MR DWI: Lymphoma tends to restrict diffusion more than toxoplasmosis does.
MR perfusion: Lymphoma has higher rCBV than toxoplasmosis.
MR spectroscopy: Lymphoma shows elevated choline compared to toxoplasmosis.
FDG PET: Lymphoma has higher glucose metabolism than toxoplasmosis does.
Thallium SPECT: Lymphoma more avidly takes up thallium than toxoplasmosis does.
Secondary CNS lymphoma
Secondary CNS lymphoma represents involvement of the CNS in a patient with known
systemic lymphoma.
Secondary CNS lymphoma is more commonly extra-axial, involving eptomeninges, dura,
and/or skull. Less commonly, it may present as a parenchymal mass.
METASTATIC DISEASE
Overview
The most common primary tumors to cause intracranial metastases are lung cancer, breast
cancer, and melanoma.
Brain parenchymal metastases are more common than meningeal metastases.
Brain metastases are more common than primary brain malignancies in adults.
Intra-axial metastasis
Most parenchymal metastases are hematogenous and arise at the gray-white matter
junction, where there is a caliber change in the small arterioles.
Enhancement is universal, as capillaries produced by an extra-CNS primary tumor do not
have a functioning blood-brain barrier.
Larger metastases often feature marked edema, while small metastases may present as tiny
enhancing foci that are apparent only on the post-contrast images.
Factors that increase lesion conspicuity on contrast-enhanced imaging include higher contrast dose,
gadolinium-based contrast agent with greater relaxivity, delayed imaging after contrast injection, and
higher magnetic field strength.
Neuro Brain: 725