Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA)
Large airway involvement is seen in approximately 20% of patients with GPA, most
commonly manifesting as subglottic tracheal stenosis with circumferential mucosal
thickening.
The posterior membranous trachea is not spared. Calcifications are not seen.
Sarcoidosis
Tracheal involvement by sarcoid is rare and usually seen in advanced disease. Tracheal
sarcoid has a variable appearance ranging from smooth stenosis to a nodular or mass-like
appearance.
The posterior membranous trachea is not spared.
LARGE AIRWAYS
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is progressive, irreversible dilation of cartlage-containing bronchi.
Three etiologies of bronchiectasis have been described, with a final common pathway of
mucus plugging, superimposed bacterial colonization, and inflammatory response.
Bronchial wall injury, typically from infection or inflammation.
Bronchial lumen obstruction.
Traction from adjacent fibrosis.
Morphologic classification of bronchiectasis is most useful as a rough gauge of severity.
Cylindrical bronchiectasis (least severe): Mild bronchial dilation.
Varicose bronchiectasis (moderately severe): Bronchi may become beaded and irregular.
Cystic bronchiectasis (most severe): Bronchi are markedly enlarged and ballooned.
Radiographic findings depend on severity. In mild cases only tram tracks may be visible,
representing thickened bronchial walls causing parallel radiopaque lines resembling tram
tracks. In more severe cases there can be extensive cystic change.
CT findings include the signet ring sign, which describes a dilated bronchus adjacent to a
normal pulmonary artery branch.
Normally each bronchus should be approximately the same size as the adjacent pulmonary artery branch.
Other CT findings of bronchiectasis include lack of bronchial tapering, bronchial wall thickening, and
mucus-filled bronchi. Often, adjacent tree-in-bud nodules are present, likely representing associated
small-airways infection.
Traction bronchiectasis occurs secondary to lung fibrosis (see earlier discussion of ILD).
Patterns of primary bronchiectasis can be divided into lung zones and central to peripheral
distribution:
Upper lung: cystic fibrosis, ABPA.
Mid lung: atypical mycobacteria.
Lower lung: chronic aspiration, post-infectious, immotile cilia, immunodeficiency.
Central: ABPA, Mounier-Kuhn trachebronchomegaly.
Mid-order bronchi: Willams-Campbel. (fourth to sixth order bronchi).
Chest: 85