Invasive ductal carcinoma (continued)
Left mammographic image shows an irregular mass with spiculated margins and associated calcifications (not
well seen at this resolution); this was found to be invasive ductal carcinoma. Right mammographic image
shows grouped calcifications (arrows) in the same breast at a separate location; biopsy showed DCIS.
Combined, a number of less common subtypes make up <10% of all breast cancers. Some of
these special subtypes have better prognosis than IDC NOS (not otherwise specified).
Tubular carcinoma is a low-grade cancer that typically presents as architectural distortion
or a small spiculated mass and accounts for <2% of invasive ductal cancers.
Mucinous carcinoma (synonyms: colloid carcinoma, mucoid carcinoma, and gelatinous
carcinoma) accounts for approximately 2% of breast cancers and is more common in older
women. It often presents as a circumscribed mass on mammography. It can show acoustic
enhancement on ultrasound and high T2 signal intensity on MRI, features which might
cause it to be confused with a benign lesion.
Medullary carcinoma accounts for <5% of breast cancer and is typically seen in younger
women, often with BRCA1 mutation. It frequently presents as a more circumscribed mass
on mammograpny and ultrasound. Despite its classification as a basal-like triple negative
breast cancer, medullary carcinoma has a favorable prognosis.
Encapsulated papillary carcinoma/solid papillary carcinoma accounts for <2% of breast
cancer and is most common in older women (average onset age 69.5 years). It may present
clinically as a palpable mass or nipple discharge. It often appears mammographically as
a round or oval mass with predominantly circumscribed margins. Ultrasound shows a
complex cystic and solid mass in the setting of encapsulated papillary carcinoma.
Adenoid cystic carcinoma is a variant of adenocarcinoma typically seen in the salivary
gland, but very rarely occurs in the breast (<0.1% of all breast cancers). Mammographic
appearances can include an irregular mass, distortion or asymmetry.
Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC)
Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) comprises approximately 5-10% of breast cancer cases.
Compared to invasive ductal carcinoma, invasive lobular is typically much more difficult to
diagnose mammographically and clinically due to its tendency to spread through the breast
tissue without forming a discrete mass.
ILC presents an imaging challenge due to its elusive appearance, which ranges from a one-
view asymmetry to architectural distortion to a spiculated mass.
Inflammatory carcinoma
Inflammatory carcinoma is a very aggressive form of breast cancer that represents tumor
invasion of dermal lymphatics; it carries a poor prognosis.
Clinically, inflammatory carcinoma presents with breast erythema, edema, and firmness,
often referred to as a peau d'orange or orange peel appearance.
Breast: 371