DEGENERATIVE SPINE
Overview of degenerative spine
Symptomatic lumbar spine degeneration is extraordinarily common and imposes a large
societal health care burden.
The major anatomic units involved in lumbar spine degeneration are the disc-endplate
complexes anteriorly, and the facet joints and ligamentum flavum posteriorly.
Symptoms may be due to neural compression (typically producing radicular pain) or
localized inflammatory changes (typically producing axial back pain).
Neural compression may occur at any of three sites: The spinal canal, the lateral recess, or
the neural foramen. Each of these will be discussed in detail.
Axial back pain may come from the disc-endplate complex (such as endplate edema, acute
Schmorl's node, or annular fissure), or facet arthropathy. Again, these will be subsequently
discussed.
In order to best guide surgical, interventional pain, and conservative management options, it
is important to have consistent nomenclature and grading of spinal degenerative findings.
In 2014, the North American Spine Society, American Society of Spine Radiology, and
the American Society of Neuroradiology published their version 2.0 of lumbar disc
nomenclature, which was revised from the initial 1995 version. This text will adhere to
these consensus nomenclature guidelines, which are bolded and italicized throughout this
section. Of note, the nomenclature aims to describe morphology of lumbar degenerative
findings, but only discusses grading of severity in a cursory manner.
Several detailed grading schemes have been proposed for the severity of spinal stenosis,
lateral recess stenosis, neural foraminal stenosis, and facet arthropathy. We will attempt to
synthesize these into a simplified universal classification.
Despite efforts to standardize the nomenclature and grading, there is a fair amount of inter-
observer variability in the reporting of degenerative spinal lesions.
ANTERIOR STRUCTURES: DISC-ENDPLATE COMPLEXES
Structure and patterns of injury of the disc-endplate complex
The intervertebral discs and vertebral body endplates function together as a load-bearing
unit, allowing flexion and extension.
The normal intervertebral disc is composed of a central gelatinous nucleus pulposus and a
fibrous peripheral annulus fibrosus.
The vertebral body endplate is comprised of a thin layer of hyaline cartilage. Branches of
the segmental lumbar arteries supply the endplates (but not the disc itself in adults), and
diffusion of nutrients across the endplate is an important source of nutrients for the disc.
Of the disc-endplate complex, it is the endplates that are most susceptible to axial loading,
resulting in endplate fractures.
Chronic tensile stress on posterior aspect of annulus fibrosus (such as due to repeated
spinal flexion, especially if under load due to suboptimal spinal mechanics) can lead to a
progressive spiral of degenerative changes involving the disc-endplate complex.
Discovertebral degeneration may include a spectrum of morphologic changes including
disc dessication, disc fibrosis, disc height loss, disc mucinous degeneration, intradiscal gas,
vertebral osteophytes, vertebral endplate edema, and vertebral endplate sclerosis.
Spine: 881