Transtentorial herniation (continued)
Effacement of the perimesencephalic cisterns may be a sign of impending or actual
transtentorial herniation.
Downward transtentorial herniation involves inferomedial displacement of the mesial
temporal lobe (uncal herniation) or less commonly, inferior displacement of the thalamus
and midbrain (central herniation) through the tentorial notch.
The ipsilateral cranial nerve III (oculomotor nerve) may be compressed, leading to pupillary dilation and
downward and out eye deviation.
Compression of thei ipsilateral posterior cerebral artery (PCA) may cause medial temporal/occipital lobe
infarct.
Small Duret hemorrhages within the medulla or brainstem are caused by shearing of perforating basilar
artery branches due to downward force on the brainstem.
Compression of the contralateral cerebral peduncle against the tentorial notch can cause al hemiparesis
ipsilateral to the herniated side (Kernohan notch phenomenon).
Central herniation causes progressive impairment of brainstem function such as coma, breathing
abnormality, and posturing.
Duret hemorrhage: Noncontrast CT shows a left subdural hematoma (*; left image) causing rightward midline
shift (yellow arrow) and downward transtentorial herniation with effacement of the perimesencephalic
cisterns (red arrows; right image), and associated Duret hemorrhages within the pons (blue arrows).
Upward (ascending) transtentorial herniation is superior displacement of the upper parts of
the cerebellum due to posterior fossa mass effect.
The main complication is obstructive hydrocephalus from aqueductal compression.
Cerebellar tonsillar herniation
Tonsillar herniation refers to downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils through
foramen magnum, preferably attributed to mass effect (rather than a normal variant or
Chiari malformation where terms like tonsillar ectopia or low-lying tonsils are appropriately
less alarming).
Subsequent compression of medullary respiratory centers is often fatal.
Extracranial transcalvarial) herniation
Extracranial herniation refers to shift of brain tissue outside of the brain case, typically at
a surgical or traumatic calvarial defect and attributed to abnormal intracranial mass effect
(rather than a malformation where the term encephalocele is more common).
Extracranial herniation is an expected feature following decompressive craniectomy.
However, a mushroom-like appearance suggests the craniectomy defect is too small,
potentially constricting vessels and brain tissue at the margins.
Neuro Brain: 656