EXTRA-MUCOSAL NECK SPACES
Overview of head and neck spaces
The complex layers of cervical fascia create several spaces in the suprahyoid neck.
Knowledge of these spaces is useful in creating differential diagnoses for neck masses, as
specific lesions tend to arise in characteristic locations.
RETROPHARYNGEAL SPACE
pharyngobasilar fascia
pharynx
retropharyngeal space
alar fascia
danger space
prevertebral fascia
prevertebral space -
the prevertebral space
is the anterior component
ofthe perivertebralspace
The retropharyngeal space is a potential space located posterior to the pharynx, separated
from the pharynx by the pharyngobasilar fascia. The retropharyngeal space extends from
the base of the skull to the upper mediastinum. Directly lateral to the retropharyngeal space
are the carotid and parapharyngeal spaces.
The alar fascia is directly posterior to the retropharyngeal space. The alar fascia separates
the retropharyngeal space from another potential space, the danger space, which acts as a
trapdoor for infection to travel all the way from the neck to the diaphragm.
The prevertebral space (the anterior component of the perivertebral space in the
suprahyoid neck) is located just anterior to the vertebral body and is bounded anteriorly by
the prevertebral fascia.
Benign and inflammatory lesions of the retropharyngeal space:
A medially deviated internal carotid artery may mimic a mass on endoscopic evaluation or may be
injured during spine surgery.
Lipomas, fibromyxomas, and venous malformations can occur in the retropharynx.
Spread of infection into the retropharynx can result in a retropharyngeal abscess, discussed later in this
chapter.
Malignant lesions of the retropharyngeal space:
Primary malignant lesions are uncommon. The most common malignant lesion is malignant
ymphadenopathy, most frequently associated with nasopharyngeal SCC. Other primary tumors which
are associated with retropharyngeal ymphadenopathy include: Papillary thyroid carcinoma, melanoma.
Contiguous spread of primary tumors in the nasopharynx can involve the retropharyngeal space, such as
nasopharyngeal SCC and habdomyosarcoma.
Neuro Head & Neck: 845