Cephalocele
A cephalocele is a midline neural tube defect characterized by protrusion of intracranial
structures outside of the calvarium. The occipital skull is the most common location.
A meningocele contains only meninges. An encephalocele also contains neural tissue.
In addition to cephalocele, the primary differential consideration of a mass posterior to the
occipital skull is a cystic hygroma, which is a congenital lymphatic malformation and the
most common fetal neck mass.
Dandy Walker malformation
Dandy Walker is a diverse spectrum of diseases characterized by hypogenesis of the
cerebellar vermis and resultant fourth ventricular dilation.
Dandy Walker is associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum.
Differential diagnosis includes Blake's pouch cyst (embryological structure contiguous with
the fourth ventricle that fails to regress) and mega cisterna magna (delayed fenestration of
Blake's pouch) which are risk factors for associated anomalies but when isolated have an
excellent prognosis, unlike Dandy Walker malformation and vermian hypoplasia.
Chiari II / Myelomeningorele
Chiari II is the combination of a small posterior fossa and a neural tube defect. By far
the most common associated neural tube defect is a lumbar myelomeningocele. A
myelomeningocele contains both neural elements and meninges.
The banana sign describes the characteristic flattened cerebellar hemispheres in the small
posterior fossa. The banana sign is very specific for Chiari II.
The lemon sign describes flattening of the frontal bones, causing the calvarium to have the
morphology of a lemon when seen axially. Unlike the banana sign, the lemon sign is not
specific for Chiari II.
A myelomeningocele may be difficult to visualize by ultrasound but is presumed to be
present if the brain is abnormal, as the brain abnormalities are more easily appreciated
sonographically.
Fetal ultrasound through the brain and posterior
Sagittal ultrasound through the thoracolumbar spine
fossa demonstrates the banana and lemon signs. in a different fetus shows a lumbar open neural tube
There is flattening of the frontal bones (lemon sign, defect (arrow) representing either a meningocele or
yellow arrows) and flattening of the cerebellar
myelomeningocele.
hemispheres (banana sign, red arrows). Although
the lemon sign is nonspecific, the banana sign is very
specific for Chiari II.
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD, Diagnostic Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Obstetrics: 349