Imaging diagnosis of GI bleed (continued)
Rates of bleeding that can be detected by different imaging modalities:
Tc-99m-labeled RBC scintigraphy: <0.1 mL/min
CTA: 0.3-0.5 mL/min
DSA: 0.5-1.0 mL/min
For detection of GI bleed, CTA and Tc-99m-labeled RBC scintigraphy have comparable
sensitivities, although CTA has higher sensitivity to locate the bleeding. Intermittent bleeding
is the most common cause of false-negative results on CTA.
CTA protocol includes three phases: noncontrast, arterial phase, and delayed/venous phase.
Imaging findings of GI bleed on CTA include:
Intraluminal hyperattenuation on noncontrast phase, representing hematoma/clot.
Intraluminal extravasation of contrast material is the main criteria to locate the bleeding point.
Changing morphology of the extravasated contrast material with time (assessed on delayed images)
confirms the diagnosis.
Diverticular bleed
Diverticular bleed: Tagged red blood cell scan at 15, 30, and 45 minutes shows abnormal tracer accumulation
at the hepatic flexure (arrow) with rapid transit into the distal colon by 45 minutes.
Noncontrast CT (left image) shows diverticulosis of the right colon (yellow arrow). Contrast-enhanced CT, aortic
phase, shows dependent active extravasation of contrast in the region of the diverticulum (red arrow).
Diverticulosis is the most common cause of lower GI bleeding in older adults.
Imaging finding on CTA is active bleeding within extensive diverticulosis.
Most patients respond to conservative management, but angiography can be used for
stable or unstable patients who fail medical management. Potential therapies include
superselective embolization (most commonly with coils) or vasopressin infusion.
Angiodysplasia
Angiodysplasia is an acquired vascular anomaly that is a common cause of chronic
intermittent lower GI bleeding, most typically located in the right colon or cecum. Because
angiodysplasia is SO prevalent (identified in up to 15% of patients incidentally), the presence
of angiodysplasia in a bleeding patient should not stop the hunt for other possible sources.
Vascular: 570