CEREBELLOPONTINE ANGLE (CPA) MASS
Overview and anatomy of the CPA
clivus
porus acousticus
internal acoustic meatus
basilar artery
cochlea
AICA
vestibule & -
cerebello-
semicircular canals
pons
pontine
t-bone
angle cistern
facial nerve
flocculus of
vestibulocochlear nerve
cerebellum
lateral recess
4th ventricle
cerebellum
4th ventricle
The cerebellopontine angle (CPA) is a region between the pons and cerebellum and the
posterior aspect of the petrous temporal bone. Important structures of the CPA include the
fifth (trigeminal), seventh (facial), and eighth vestipulocochear, cranial nerves, and the
anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA).
Most lesions of the CPA are extra-axial and located in the CPA cistern itself, although some
may arise in the internal auditory canal (IAC), temporal bone, or rarely intra-axially from the
pons or cerebellum. CPA masses are more common in adults.
Schwannoma
Vestibular schwannoma: Axial T2- (left image) and T1-weighted post-contrast MRI demonstrate a
heterogeneously enhancing mass in the left cerebellopontine angle with an ice cream cone appearance that
indents the cerebellar-pontine, junction (yellow arrow) and protrudes into the internal acoustic meatus (red
arrow). The porus acousticus is slightly widened (blue arrows).
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Schwannoma of the vestibulocochlear nerve, also known as a vestibular schwannoma, is by
far the most common cerebellopontine angle mass, representing greater than 75% of all CPA
masses.
Most frequently present in the fifth to seventh decades of life in sporadic cases and in the
second decade of life in the setting of neurofibromatosis type II, which is associated with
bilateral vestibular schwannomas.
Vestibular schwannoma is isoattenuating to the cerebellum on CT, hyperintense on T2-
weighted images and avidly enhances. The characteristic ice cream cone appearance
describes the "cone" protruding through (and widening) the porus acousticus and the "ice
cream" exerting mass effect on the cerebellar-pontine junction. Schwannoma may become
cystic, especially when larger.
Neuro Head & Neck: 826