Acute mesenteric ischemia
Acute mesenteric ischemia typically presents as catastrophic abdominal pain, often with
lactic acidosis. Acute mesenteric ischemia is most commonly caused by an SMA embolus.
An SMA embolism distal to the middle colic artery carries the highest high risk of intestinal
ischemia, as there are few native distal collaterals. The middle colic artery anastomoses with
the IMA via the marginal artery of Drummond and the arc of Riolan.
In most patients with acute mesenteric ischemia, treatment is surgical revascularization
(embolectomy or bypass), direct inspection of bowel, and resection of necrotic bowel.
In select patients with acute embolic mesenteric ischemia (patients without peritoneal signs
or clinical findings suggestive of bowel necrosis), endovascular therapy with thrombolysis or
suction embolectomy may be performed.
Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI) is a highly lethal (70-100% mortality) form of
acute mesenteric ischemia. NOMI is also known as "intestinal necrosis with a patent arterial
tree" and features spasm and narrowing of multiple branches of the mesenteric arteries.
Direct arterial infusion of the vasodilator papaverine (60 mg bolus, then 30-60 mg/hr) is the
primary treatment of NOMI.
LT
Acute mesenteric ischemia: 79-year-old female presented with altered mental status, found to have bowel
wall thickening and multifocal thrombus of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) on CT. Diagnostic angiogram
shows extensive atherosclerotic calcifications and near total occlusion of the proximal SMA (left image,
arrow). A catheter was positioned across the thrombus and left in place for overnight infusion of tPA. The next
day, angiography of the superior mesenteric artery demonstrates substantially decreased clot burden with
improved flow to thej jejunal branch vessels (right image, arrow).
Chronic mesenteric ischemia
Chronic mesenteric ischemia is usually caused by atherosclerosis. The classic clinical
presentation is postprandial abdominal pain out of proportion to the physical exam.
Mesenteric angiography shows ostial narrowing of the mesenteric vessels, often with post-
stenotic dilation. The lateral aortogram is the most useful view to evaluate the origins of the
celiac and superior mesenteric arteries.
Because mesenteric collaterals are SO extensive, at least two of three mesenteric arteries
(celiac, SMA, and IMA) must be diseased to produce symptoms in chronic disease.
Chronic mesenteric ischemia can be treated with endovascular angioplasty and stenting.
IR: 613