Ependymoma
Ependymomas are the most common intramedullary tumor in adults and second most
common in children. They are associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 (along with
schwannomas and meningiomas).
Most are low-grade (WHO grade II). Myxopapillary ependymoma (WHO grade I) is
frequently intraduralextramedulany with distinct prognosis and imaging appearances
(discussed separately in the next section).
pendymomas have well-defined margins and intense, neterogeneous enhancement. Cystic
components are: seen in up to half (more commonly polar/nontumoral. than intratumoral)
and a syrinx may be present. Hemorrhage is common, resulting in the hemosiderin cap. sign
(hypointense poles on T2-weighted images).
Hemangioblastoma
Spinal nemangiopastomas are uncommon benign (WHO grade I) tumors in adults. They
are associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, which should be suspected when there
are multiple lesions in the neuraxis (most commonly involving spinal cord, retina, and
cerebellum).
Although usually intramedullary, they tend to be superficially and posteriorly located in the
cord and may have an exophytic (intradural extramedullary) component, as if arising from
the linings of pial vessels.
emangioblastomas have well-defined margins and intense, homogeneous enhancement.
They are typically small (involving only one vertebral level). Larger lesions can show vascular
flow voids, cystic components, or a syrinx. Surrounding edema may also be seen.
Metastasis
Intramedullary metastases are rare compared to primary intramedulary tumors and
to eptomeningeal or epidural metastases of the spine. Concurrent metastatic disease
elsewhere is common.
Lung cancer is the most common metastasis and breast cancer is the second most common.
Intramedullary metastases usually have well-defined margins and enhance. Specific signs
include the rim sign (more intense enhancement peripherally than centrally) and flame sign
(ill-defined triangular enhancement projecting from the superior/inferior margin). Cystic/
necrotic components and hemorrhage are rare. Surrounding edema is often extensive.
Intramedullary metastases typically involve a short segment of cord (one to two vertebral
levels). They are usually solitary rather than multiple.
SPINAL CORD INFLAMMATORY/INFECTIOUS LESIONS
Sagittal cord involvement (non-neoplastic)
MS: Multiple sclerosis
Short segment
Long segment
NMO: Neuromyelitis optica
MS
transverse myelitis
anti-MOG associated myelitis: A
transverse myelitis (uncommon)
NMO
newly recognized inflammatory
hemorrhage
MS (uncommon)
demyelinating disorder caused
acute/subacute infection
cord infarction
by anti-myelin oligodendrocyte
vascular malformation
glycoprotein (anti-MOG)
sarcoidosis
chronic infection
antibodies.
sarcoidosis
anti-MOG: associated myelitis
Spine: 863