RENAL INFECTION AND INFLAMMATION
Pyelonephritis
Pyelonephritis: Axial (left image) and coronal (right image) contrastenhanced CT demonstrates an enlarged
left kidney with delayed and striated nephrogram. These imaging features are nonspecific but are compatible
with acute pyelonephritis given patient's clinical symptoms and positive urinalysis.
Pyelonephritis is infection of renal parenchyma and is the most common bacterial infection
of the kidney. Infection typically ascends from the bladder.
CT imaging findings of pyelonephritis can be nonspecific, and the kidneys can appear normal
in up to 75% of cases. Additional imaging patterns include unilateral kidney enlargement,
wedge-shaped or striated regions of decreased enhancement, and perinephric stranding.
The urothelium may also be thickened and hyperenhancing.
Focal pyelonephritis (previously called focal lobar nephronia) may mimic a renal mass.
On ultrasound, the classic appearance of focal pyelonephritis is a hypoechoic mass (or
masses) with low-amplitude echoes that disrupts the corticomedullary junction. A distinct
wall is lacking. Mild hydronephrosis can be seen on the affected side, thought to be due to a
bacterial endotoxin causing reduced peristalsis, and should not be confused with obstructive
uropathy.
Pyonephrosis
Pyonephrosis due to malpositioned nephroureteral stent: Initial ultrasound (left image) shows moderate
hydronephrosis with a subtle echogenic dependent fluid-debris level (arrows). Low-level echoes are present
within the collecting system. The nephroureteral stent is not visualized.
Subsequent ultrasound less than 12 hours later (right image) shows marked progression of hydronephrosis,
a much larger fluid-debris level (arrows), and low level internal echoes within the dilated collecting system.
Scanning of the distal ureter (not shown) revealed a malpositioned nephroureteral stent as the cause of
obstruction. Case courtesy. Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Pyonephrosis is the infection of an obstructed collecting system and is colloquially referred
to as "pus under pressure." Treatment is emergent relief of obstruction, either with
percutaneous nephrostomy or ureteral stent.
Ultrasound shows nonshadowing echogenic material within a dilated collecting system. A
fluid-fluid level may be present.
GU: 253