NEUROVASCULAR ANATOMY
INTERNAL CAROTID ARTERY (ICA)
MCA'
PCA
ACA
anterior
ophthalmic artery, 1
choroidal
artery
segments of ICA
supraclinoid
dural ring -
posterior
communicating
artery
cavernous
petrous
cervical
The segmental nomenclature of the internal carotid artery (ICA) is not universally agreed
upon. The simplest is the Gibo classification, reflected below along with the major branches.
Note that many of the branches are infrequently seen on imaging.
The cervical segment extends from the carotid bifurcation to the skull base and gives off no
branches.
The petrous segment extends through the carotid canal and slightly past foramen lacerum
while giving off the caroticotympanic and Vidian arteries.
The cavernous segment begins a series of back-and-forth bends historically called the
"carotid siphon" while giving off the meningohypophyseal trunk and the inferolateral trunk.
The meningohypophyseal trunk supplies the pituitary and nearby meninges.
The inferolateral trunk supplies the third through sixth cranial nerves and nearby meninges.
The supraclinoid segment is the intradural portion that gives off the ophthalmic, superior
hypophyseal, posterior communicating, and anterior choroidal arteries.
The ophthalmic artery supplies the orbital structures. It can be used as a landmark for the distal dural
ring, such that aneurysms located at or superior to the ophthalmic artery are intradural. Given the risk
of subarachnoid hemorrhage, these aneurysms are treated more aggressively than aneurysms located
proximal to the distal dural ring, which are contained.
The superior hypophyseal artery supplies the hypothalamus and pituitary stalk.
The posterior communicating artery (P-comm) is an anastomosis to the posterior circulation. A1 fetal
posterior cerebral artery (PCA) is a variant supplied entirely by thei ipsilateral ICA via an enlarged P-comm.
The anterior choroidal artery supplies the anteromesial temporal lobe including the head of
hippocampus, as well as deep brain structures including the optic tract, lateral thalamus, and posterior
limb and retrolenticular part of the internal capsule.
The ICA terminus bifurcates into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
Neuro Brain: 666