lodinated contrast and thyroid uptake
Thyroid gland uptake of I-131 is reduced to about 50% one week after iodinated contrast
injection. Therefore, if radioactive I-131 therapy is planned, iodinated contrast should be
avoided for one month prior to I-131 therapy.
Metformin and intravenous contrast
Metformin is an oral ant-hyperglycemic agent that decreases hepatic glucose production
and increases peripheral glucose uptake. Although exceptionally rare, there is an increased
risk of metormin-associated lactic acidosis in patients receiving intravenous iodinated
contrast, thought to be due to PC-AKI and the resultant accumulation of metformin.
There is no need to discontinue metformin in patients with normal renal function. In
patients with multiple comorbidities, metformin should be discontinued at time of contrast
administration and withheld for 48 hours.
Note that it is not necessary to discontinue metformin prior to gadolinium-Dased contrast.
lodinated contrast and pregnancy
lodinated contrast crosses the placenta and enters the fetal circulation. No mutagenic or
teratogenic effects have been observed in vivo; however, no controlled studies in pregnant
patients have been performed.
It is acceptable to administer iodinated contrast to a pregnant patient if medically necessary.
It is recommended that a pregnant patient sign an informed consent form prior to
undergoing an examination involving ionizing radiation and iodinated contrast.
lodinated contrast and breast feeding
The plasma half-life of iodinated contrast is approximately two hours. Less than 1% of the
administered maternal dose of iodinated contrast is excreted in the breast milk within 24
hours of maternal administration, and 1% of that dose may be absorbed by the infant's
gastrointestinal tract. The total infant absorbed dose is therefore approximately 0.01% of
the administered maternal dose.
Breast feeding mothers do not need to halt breast feeding. If the mother is concerned,
abstaining from breast feeding for 24 hours (while pumping and discarding milk) would
result in effectively zero fetal dose.
Contrast extravasation
Extravasation is the leakage of contrast into the soft tissues at the injection site. Although
the risk of extravasation is not related to the injection flow rate, the use of automatic
injectors can lead to a large extravasated volume of contrast media.
lodinated contrast is toxic to the soft tissues and skin, although serious adverse events are
relatively rare following extravasation. The most common serious injury due to contrast
extravasation is compartment syndrome. Less commonly, skin ulceration and tissue necrosis
can occur.
All patients with extravasation should be evaluated by the radiologist. Elevation of the
extremity to decrease capillary hydrostatic pressure has been recommended, but is without
supporting data. There is no evidence favoring warm or cold compresses, and both are used
commonly.
Surgical consultation should be obtained for progressive swelling and pain, altered tissue
perfusion (decreased capillary refill), change in sensation or strength, skin ulceration or
blistering.
Physics: 1200