FLUOROSCOPY PHYSICS
Electronic magnification
If field of view (FOV) is 1 by a factor of two (e.g., from 10 cm to 5 cm), the
reduced field of view is projected onto the entire output phosphor of the image
intensifier, which will be 4 times dimmer. Therefore, skin exposure will be
increased by a factor of 4 by the automatic exposure control.
Similarly, reducing the exposed area from 10 cm to 7 cm would increase patient
entrance air kerma by a factor of two.
Fluoro technique
Continuous fluoro runs at current of 1 to 5 mA (typically 3 mA), resulting in a
very low air kerma/frame of approximately 0.01 uGy. Compared to a standard
chest X-ray exposure of 5 Gy, each fluoro frame has 500 times fewer incident
photons.
There is a federal regulatory limit of 100 mGy/min entrance air kerma.
High-dose fluoro with audible/visual alarms allows 200 mGy/min for large patients.
Effects of fluoroscopy
Increasing source to skin distance decreases dose due to inverse-square law.
techniques on dose
Increasing filtration reduces dose by removing low-energy X-rays that would be
absorbed.
Removing grid reduces dose (used in peds), at the risk of increasing scatter.
Dose spreading (moving the beam around) reduces the maximum skin dose.
Skin dose rate is about 10-30 mGy/min for continuous fluoroscopy.
Maximum exposure rate 100 mGy/min or 200 mGy/min in high-level mode.
At maximum permissible rate in high-level mode, 2 Gy can be delivered in 10 min!
Large patients are more susceptible to skin injury.
Magnification increases dose, as discussed above.
CT PHYSICS
Overview of CT
Computed tomography (CT) produces images by rotating a fan beam around
the patient and determining the linear attenuation coefficients of each
individual pixel using a reconstruction algorithm.
Hounsfield units (HU)
A Hounsfield unit is a measure of relative CT attenuation.
Hx A water
HU = 1000
water
Hx = attenuation coefficient of the material being measuring
Hwater = attenuation coefficient of water
10 HU = 1% difference in contrast.
Gray matter and white matter differ in contrast by only 0.5%.
A material with twice the attenuation of water attenuates 1000 HU.
Physics: 1209