Bronchial atresia (continued)
The bronchi distal to the atretic segment become filled with mucus that cannot be cleared,
ultimately forming a tubular mucocele (finger in glove). The distal airways are ventilated
through collateral pathways and demonstrate air trapping, resulting in local hyperinflation.
Imaging shows a geographic region of hyperlucent lung with air trapping. A mucous plug
may be visible just distal to the obstructed bronchial segment.
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
A pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is a purely vascular malformation
representing anomalous connection between the pulmonary artery and pulmonary veins.
About 60% of cases are associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-
Weber-Rendu disease).
Patients can present with cyanosis, clubbing, dyspnea, hemoptysis and polycythemia.
There is an association with Glenn-shunting prior to the completion of the Fontan circulation
due to the lack of hepaticized blood flow.
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) / congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM)
CPAM: Axial (left image) and coronal (right) CT images show a large, multicystic mass in the right upper lung
(arrows) with both large and small cysts, representing a mixed type I and type II CPAM.
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), previously termed congenital
cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM), is a hamartomatous proliferation of terminal
bronchioles that communicate with the bronchial tree.
The arterial supply of CPAM arises from the pulmonary circulation. In contrast, sequestration
(discussed below) derives its blood supply from the systemic circulation.
The original Classification (Stocker, revised in 2002) is important to be aware of, but the
prognosis of CPAM depends more on the size of the lesion rather than its classification.
Type :: One or more large cysts >2 cm. Most common form.
Type I: Multiple thin-walled small cysts. Can be associated with renal agenesis.
Type II: Solid-appearing with innumerable tiny cysts (<5 mm).
Type IV: Single large cyst, may be indistinguishable from a cystic pleuropulmonary blastoma, a rare
malignancy that is the most common primary childhood lung tumor.
CPAM may exert mass effect and is prone to infection. Surgery is usually recommended as
they are difficult to differentiate from pleuropulmonary blastoma.
Peds: 1100