Obstruction due to adhesions (continued)
Adhesions are an imaging diagnosis of exclusion as they are not directly visualized by
imaging. On CT, a transition point is seen, but no alternative cause for the transition (e.g., no
mass or hernia, etc.) is identified.
In the absence of signs of impending ischemia, this is usually managed non-operatively with
nasogastric tube decompression and bowel rest.
Obstruction due to external hernia
Protrusion of bowel through an abdominal wall defect is the second most common cause
of SBO. Approximately 75% of external hernias occur in the groin, with the majority being
inguinal hernias.
The term strangulation refers to ischemia due to vascular compromise by the hernia.
The term incarceration refers to a hernia that cannot be reduced and is a physical exam
finding, not an imaging finding.
An inguinal hernia may be either indirect or direct, depending on the relation of the hernia
to the inferior epigastric vessels.
Indirect: Indirect inguinal hernia is the most common type and is more common in males. The neck of
the hernia is lateral to thei inferior epigastric vessels. Hernia contents travel with the spermatic cord,
often into the scrotum. Indirect inguinal hernias are considered congenital due to a patent processus
vaginalis.
Direct: The neck of a direct inguinal hernia is medial to the inferior epigastric vessels, protruding through
a weak area in the anterior abdominal wall (Hesselbach's triangle). The hernia contents do not go into the
scrotum. These are considered acquired and may be caused by increased intra-abdominal pressure, such
as obesity, COPD and chronic constipation.
When an inguinal hernia contains the appendix, it is called an Amyand hernia.
When it contains a Meckel's diverticulum, it is called a Littre hernia.
Direct inguinal hernia:
Axial contrast-enhanced CT shows
a direct inguinal hernia on the right
containing a portion of the urinary
bladder (yellow arrow). Note the
right inferior epigastric vessels
and inguinal canal contents (red
arrow) are displaced laterally and
compressed by the hernia. The right
common femoral artery and vein are
normal in caliber (blue arrows).
GI: 200