Compare each side
Each projection should be globally compared side-to-side to evaluate for symmetry.
Evaluate and magnify each image
Each image should be carefully evaluated for signs of malignancy. The mammographic signs
of malignancy are mass, calcification, architectural distortion, and asymmetry. Calcifications
are best viewed at 1:1 or higher magnification, while architectural distortion is best seen
when the whole breast is visualized.
When viewing a digital mammogram, every portion of the image should be carefully
evaluated at 1:1 zoom.
Compare to prior studies
Even if a study appears unremarkable at first glance, comparison to prior exams can often
reveal a subtle progressive change. For instance, an apparent normal island of parenchymal
tissue may be slowly growing and represent malignancy.
In general, it is best to carefully compare the previous exam from at least two years prior, to
appreciate slowly growing changes.
IBROGLANDULAR DENSITY
Almost entirely fatty
Scattered areas of
Heterogeneously dense, which Extremely dense, which lowers
fibroglandular density
may obscure small masses
the sensitivity of mammography
In every mammographic report, the mammographic pattern of fibroglandular density should
be characterized into one of the above descriptors.
Women with dense fibroglandular tissue have an increased risk of developing breast cancer,
and detection of early cancer can be obscured by the hbroglandular tissue. A woman with
extremely dense breasts has a 5x relative risk of breast cancer compared to a woman with
almost entirely fatty breasts.
Bilateral interval increase in fibroglandular density is usually benign and may be caused
either by hormonal effects or breast edema. A unilateral increase in fibroglandular density is
worrisome for lymphatic obstruction, which may be malignant.
Edema due to systemic causes, such as congestive heart failure, typically causes bilateral
trabecular blurring and skin thickening.
Hormone therapy may cause an increase in fibroglandular density, without skin thickening.
Proliferation of cysts and fibrocystic change can be seen, even in postmenopausal women.
Pregnancy, lactation, and weight loss may all cause an interval increase in fibroglandular
density.
Breast: 378