Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD; continued)
A classic imaging feature of FMD is the string of beads sign, caused by alternating stenosis
and aneurysmal dilation of the renal artery. Less common imaging features are focal
stenosis (intimal type FMD) or dissection and aneurysm.
FMD clinically responds well to angioplasty alone, with improved blood pressure control in
97%, including a 42% cure rate and a 90% patency rate at 5 years.
Stenting of FMD is not recommended, as stenting can complicate retreatment with
angioplasty and lead to in-stent stenosis due to intimal hyperplasia.
Neurofibromatosis
Neurofibromatosis may cause hypertension in children due to renal artery stenosis.
Renal artery stenosis from NF1 may be angiographically indistinguishable from Takayasu
arteritis, the most common cause of renal artery stenosis in children.
Renal arteriovenous fistulas and malformations
Renal arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) are anomalous direct communications between arteries
and veins in the kidney, and almost always acquired, secondary to trauma or renal biopsy.
Renal arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are rare congenital entities, and similarly there
is abnormal connection between arterial and venous vessels. However, AVM almost always
has a vascular nidus.
CTA is an ideal imaging modality to assess. AVF or AVM. Classical imaging features are large
renal artery, associated aneurysmal dilation at the level of the venous communication, and
early opacification of the renal vein during the arterial phase images.
Similar findings can be seen on MRA. In addition, on T2-weighted images, large, round signal
voids can be seen within the kidney.
Angiography of an AVF shows venous opacification during the arterial phase.
The majority of renal AVFS are asymptomatic and often heal spontaneously. When
symptomatic, hematuria is the most common complaint. Less commonly, a renal AVF can
lead to high-output cardiac failure or spontaneous retroperitoneal hemorrhage.
Treatment of a renal AVF or AVM is with embolization (coils, glue, or alcohol).
GASTROINTESTINAL (GI) BLEEDING
Imaging diagnosis of GI bleed
Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding could be upper GI bleeding (-15%) (proximal to the ligament
of Treitz) or lower GI bleeding (-85%) (distal to the ligament of Treitz). This chapter focuses
on lower GI bleeding as it is far more common.
Upper GI bleeding presents with hematemesis or melena.
Lower GI bleeding presents with hematochezia or melena.
Etiologies of lower GI bleeding vary based on age. In young adults, common causes are
inflammatory bowel disease or Meckel diverticulum. In older patients, common causes
include colonic diverticula, angiodysplasia, neoplasm, or hemorrhoids.
Colonoscopy is the first-line modality for diagnosing lower GI bleeding. However, in certain
clinical scenarios, either CTA or echnetum.99m-abeled RBC scintigraphy can be performed
as alternatives. Both modalities have limited sensitivity since bleeding is often intermittent.
The positivity rate of CTA for extravasation is higher if performed within 4 hours or as soon
as possible following the last episode of bleeding.
Vascular: 569