Seminal vesicles (SV)
The seminal vesicles (SV) produce and secrete seminal fluid (50-80% of ejaculate volume).
The seminal vesicles are located posterior to the bladder/distal ureters and superior to the
prostate gland, joining the distal portion of the vas deferens to form the ejaculatory duct,
which in turn drains into the prostatic urethra.
On MRI, they are seen as fluid-containing structures with thin septa. They show high signal
on T2-weighted imaging and low signal on T1-weighted imaging.
Bilateral SV agenesis is seen in 60-70% of patients with cystic fibrosis, likely related to
luminal obstruction by thick secretions. These patients have normal kidneys.
Congenital SV cysts or SV hypoplasia are often associated with other GU anomalies (e.g.,
psilateral renal agenesis, ADPKD).
Utricle cyst
Coronal (left image) and sagittal (right image) T2-weighted MRI show a midline cystic lesion in the prostate, at
the posterior aspect of the urethra, consistent with a prostatic utricle cyst (arrows).
An utricle cyst is a midline cystic structure within the prostate, usually located posterior to
the urethra. Utricle cysts communicate freely with the urethra and can result in post-void
dribbling.
Utricle cysts are remnants of the Mullerian duct system and are associated with
hypospadias. They are always midline and diagnosed in younger patients (10-20 years
of age) whereas Mullerian duct cysts occur in 30-40-year-old patients and can be found
anywhere along the path of regression from scrotum to utricle.
On ultrasound, a utricle cyst is seen as midline anechoic cyst posterior to the prostatic
urethra. On MRI, they demonstrate high signal on T2-weighted imaging, but can have
variable signal if they develop superimposed infection or hemorrhage.
Prostatitis
Bacterial prostatitis is fairly common (prevalence of 10%) and can manifest as acute or
chronic disease. Fluctuating PSA levels or decreasing PSA levels with antibiotic therapy raises
suspicion for prostatitis.
Acute bacterial prostatitis is less common and typically presents with local (painful urination,
hematuria) and systemic (fever, malaise) symptoms. It usually occurs in young men from
intra-prostatic reflux of infected urine, but can occur following instrumentation (e.g.,
biopsy).
Chronic bacterial prostatitis usually occurs in older men with undertreated/recurrent acute
prostatitis or lower urinary tract obstruction. Chronic prostatitis is more indolent and
presents with local symptoms only.
GU: 280