FETAL HYDROPS
Overview of hydrops
Fetal hydrops:
Transverse ultrasound of a fetal head shows diffuse
skin thickening of the scalp (arrows). Polyhydramnios
is also present (although incompletely seen on this
single image).
Case courtesy Beryl Benacerraf, MD, Diagnostic
Ultrasound. Associates, Boston.
Hydrops is a fluid-overload state characterized by at least two of the following: ascites,
pleural or pericardial effusion, skin thickening, polyhydramnios, and placental enlargement.
Hydrops may be classified as immune or non-immune. Prognosis is variable but tends to be
poor for non-immune hydrops.
Immune hydrops
Immune-mediated hydrops is fetal hemolytic anemia caused by prior maternal exposure to
fetal antigens, by far most commonly the Rh antigen.
Prognosis is good if treated with intrauterine or peripartum fetal blood transfusions.
Non-immune hydrops
Non-immune hydrops can be due to a diverse array of causes, most of which lead to a
common pathway of extracellular fluid overload. Prognosis of non-immune hydrops tends to
be poor, as the primary cause is often not effectively treatable.
Common etiologies include:
Cardiac arrhythmias.
Extra-cardiac: shunt, including vein of Galen malformation, hepatic emangioendothelioma. twin-twin
transfusion syndrome, and sacrococcygeal teratoma, all of which may lead to high-output cardiac failure.
Infectious, especially Parvovirus B19 and TORCH infections, due to fetal aplastic anemia which is
diagnosed by elevated middle cerebral artery velocity and treated with percutaneous fetal blood
transfusions.
Intrathoracic masses.
Fetal ascites
When seen with other abnormalities, ascites is a criterion for diagnosis of hydrops.
Isolated fetal ascites may be due to urinary obstruction and resultant calyceal or bladder
rupture, or bowel rupture and resultant meconium peritonitis.
Fetal pleural effusion
Fetal pleural effusion (usually bilateral) is a criterion for diagnosis of hydrops.
When seen in isolation (not a component of hydrops or due to any other abnormality), fetal
pleural effusion is most commonly a chylothorax. Fetal chylothorax is due to thoracic duct or
ymphatic malformation. Prenatally and at birth the pleural fluid is clear, but after the baby
begins to feed it becomes chylous white-colored).
Fetal pleural effusions can also be seen in Noonan, Turner, or Down syndromes.
Obstetrics: 347