Hepatic arterial anatomy and variants
Most commonly (75%), the proper hepatic artery supplies blood to the liver. The proper
hepatic artery is the continuation of the common hepatic artery after the takeoff of the
gastroduodenal artery. The proper hepatic artery divides into the right and left hepatic
arteries. The cystic artery arises from the right hepatic artery to supply the gallbladder.
The left gastroepiploic artery arises from the splenic artery and anastomoses with the right
gastroepiploic artery along the greater curvature of the stomach. The right gastroepiploic
artery arises from the gastroduodenal artery.
A replaced right hepatic artery (RRHA) is present in 10-18% of patients, where the right
hepatic artery arises from the SMA. A RRHA may become clinically significant in the setting
of SMA disease or during abdominal surgery.
left
hepatic
artery
replaced right
left gastric artery
hepatic artery
celiac
(arises from SMA)
trunk
common--
splenic artery
hepatic
cystic
artery
artery
(arises from
SMA
left gastroepiploic
RRHA)
right gastroepiploic
GDA'
It is essential for the surgeon to be aware of a RRHA prior to laparoscopic cholecystectomy to prevent
inadvertent arterial injury.
RRHA is beneficial in case of a living right hepatic donor, as the RRHA is longer and larger than a regular
RHA. This allows a better anastomosis to the recipient vasculature. In contrast, there may be increased
arterial complications if the hepatic transplant recipient has a RRHA, due to reduced diameter of the
common hepatic artery.
In the setting of a RRHA, SMA stenosis may theoretically predispose the right lobe of the liver to ischemia,
although this is usually not clinically relevant due to intrahepatic collaterals and portal vein supply.
An accessory right hepatic artery is an artery arising from the SMA that supplies the right
hepatic lobe in the presence of a normal right hepatic artery (arising from the proper
hepatic artery).
An accessory left hepatic artery is an artery arising from the left gastric artery that supplies
the left hepatic lobe in the presence of a normal left hepatic artery (arising from the proper
hepatic artery).
IR: 600