Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcosis: Axial post-contrast T1-weighted MRI (left image) and DWI (right image) show abnormal
enhancement of the choroid plexus (yellow arrows) with cystic components that demonstrate restricted
diffusion (red arrows), suggesting cryptococcomas. Lumbar puncture confirmed cryptococcal meningitis.
Cryptococcosis is the most common CNS fungal infection in patients with AIDS and is caused
by Cryptococcus neoformans. It is the third most common CNS infection in AIDS overall, after
HIV encephalopathy and toxoplasmosis.
Similar to toxoplasmosis, AIDS patients become susceptible to cryptococcus with a CD4
count less than 100 cells/uL. The most common clinical presentation is chronic basilar
meningitis. The most common imaging finding is hydrocephalus, which is very nonspecific.
Cryptococcus spreads along the basal ganglia perivascular spaces, leaving behind gelatinous
pseudocysts, which appear as round water-signal lesions on T1- and T2-weighted MRI.
Cryptococcus has a predilection for spread to the choroid plexus, producing ring-enhancing
granulomas (called cryptococcomas) within the ventricles.
Treatment is with antifungal agents including fluconazole and amphotericin B.
Aspergillosis
Aspergillus spp. are ubiquitous molds that are angioinvasive and can lead to disseminated
disease in immunocompromised patients. Routes of infection include hematogenous spread
from the lung, extension from paranasal sinuses, or direct inoculation from trauma.
Clinical presentation of invasive aspergillosis includes brain abscesses, meningitis, or
meningoencephalitis.
Aspergillus has a propensity to invade blood vessels, leading to vasculitis with secondary
thrombosis, infarction, and mycotic aneurysm formation. Superimposed hemorrhage is a
common feature.
Aspergillus abscesses may demonstrate a hypointense rim on T2-weighted and gradient-
echo images (representing hemorrhage and hemosiderin deposition) and peripheral
restricted diffusion.
Treatment includes voriconazole or amphotericin B.
Neuro Brain: 748