OVERVIEW OF OVARIAN MASSES
Ovarian mass
Functional
Endometrioma
Neoplastic
Follicular/simple cyst
Primary ovarian
Metastatic
Corpus luteal cyst
Theca-lutein cyst
Germ cell
Sex cord-stromal
Epithelial
Other
FUNCTIONAL OVARIAN CYSTS
Overview of functional ovarian cysts
Functional cysts include follicular cysts, corpus luteal cysts, and theca lutein cysts.
A follicular cyst (usually called a simple cyst), results from failed ovulation of the dominant
follicle(s). The dominant follicle continues to grow in size and is considered a follicular cyst
when >3 cm.
A simple ovarian cyst is a round or oval anechoic structure with smooth and imperceptibly thin walls,
posterior acoustic enhancement, and lack of worrisome features such as solid components, septations, or
internal flow on color Doppler.
A corpus luteal cyst results from failed involution of the corpus luteum. Like the follicular
cyst, it can continue to grow in size and must be >3 cm for diagnosis.
A corpus luteal cyst can have variable appearances, but will often look like a complex ovarian cyst. High
diastolic flow is often present, which can also be seen in ovarian cancer.
Theca lutein cysts are often multiple and arise from elevated hCG. They can be seen in
molar pregnancy, multiple gestations, or infertility patients on gonadotropins or clomiphene.
Al hemorrhagic cyst is most often the result of hemorrhage into a functional cyst, most
commonly a corpus luteum. Ultrasound findings can be suggestive, although a complex cyst
should be followed-up at least once to ensure resolution.
An acutely hemorrhagic cyst may be hyperechoic and potentially mimic a solid mass, but will usually
show posterior enhancement. As the clot dissolves, the internal echo pattern becomes more complex to
produce characteristic web-like internal echoes. Retractile mural clot features concave margins and absent
Doppler flow. In contrast, a solid mural nodule features a convex margin and internal flow
Hemorrhagic cyst:
Transvaginal color Doppler of an ovary
shows a large complex ovarian cyst
containing web-like internal echoes,
with no flow on color Doppler. Follow-
up ultrasound confirmed resolution of
the mass.
GU: 316