ACYANOTIC: INCREASED PULMONARY ARTERIAL FLOW (SHUNT VASCULARITY)
It is rare for shunt lesions to present in the neonatal period because pulmonary vascular
resistance is high, which limits left-to-right shunting. In long-standing shunting, progressive
volume overload causes the typical "shunt vascularity" (very prominent distinct pulmonary
arteries without the haziness of pulmonary edema) and cardiomegaly.
Atrial septal defect (ASD)
ostium secundum ASD
sinus venosus ASD
(SVC-type)
sinus venosus ASD
(IVC-type)
coronary sinus ASD
ostium primum ASD-
17
Although atrial septal defect (ASD) is a common intracardiac left-to-right shunt, it is rarely
diagnosed in infants or young children. ASD usually presents in later childhood or early
adulthood, twice as commonly in females. Although most are an isolated abnormality, ASD
may rarely be associated with syndromes, such as Holt-Oram (ASD and upper extremity
bone deformities, including absence or hypoplasia of the thumb).
Ostium secundum ASD is the most common type of ASD (60% of cases), caused by
incomplete covering of the ostium secundum by the septum secundum.
This is usually an isolated anomaly, located in the region of the fossa ovalis. Ostium secundum ASD may
close without treatment, in contrast to the other ASD types.
Ostium secundum ASD is associated with Ebstein anomaly.
Ostium primum ASD is the second most common type of ASD (30% of cases), caused by
incomplete fusion of the septum primum to the endocardial cushion.
The location is low in the atrial septum, contiguous with the AV valves andi is often seen with a complete
AV canal defect.
Ostium primum is associated with Down syndrome.
Sinus venosus ASD is rare (5% of cases), located either near the SVC or IVC adjacent to a
defect in the posterior wall of the right atrium.
There is a strong association with partial anomalous pulmonary venous drainage (PAPVR), particularly of
the right upper lobe.
Coronary sinus ASD is the rarest type (<1%). It is also termed "unroofed" coronary sinus and
is characterized by a partially or completely absent wall between the coronary sinus and left
atrium.
Iti is associated with a persistent left-sided SVC.
An ASD causes right heart volume overload. The left atrium is usually normal because blood
is decompressed from the left atrium to the right atrium during both systole and diastole.
However, if mitral regurgitation is present, secondary left atrial enlargement may result.
Peds: 1110