Hemorrhage, as noted before, is associated with a variety of primary and secondary brain
tumors. Tumoral hemorrhage can be distinguished from primary intracerebral hemorrhage
by detecting a contrast-enhancing mass within or around the hemorrhage.
SWI is the most sensitive sequence for detecting intratumoral microhemorrhages.
T1 shortening can be due to not only methemoglobin but also melanin. The presence of intrinsic
hyperintensity on T1-weighted images, even without corresponding susceptibility effect, raises the
possibility of metastatic melanoma.
Most hemorrhagic brain tumors are malignant. A common exception is pituitary macroadenoma.
Hypercellularity appears as hypointensity on T2-weighted images and greater restricted
diffusion. Examples include lymphoma, medulloblastoma, germinoma, and some
glioblastomas. Metastatic adenocarcinomas also frequently appear hypointense on T2-
weighted images but the histologic correlate is unclear.
Cysts are a feature of many low-grade tumors, typically at the periphery of the enhancing
component. In contrast, although necrosis of a high-grade tumor may also follow CSF signal,
necrosis tends to be central and surrounded by enhancing tumor.
In the supratentorial brain, the most common cystic tumors with a mural nodule are, ganglioglioma and
pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma.
In the infratentorial brain, the most common cystic tumors with a mural nodule are pilocytic astrocytoma
and hemangioblastoma.
In the sellar region, the most common cystic lesions are pituitary adenoma, craniopharyngioma, and
Rathke cleft cyst.
Common extra-axial tumors that occasionally show cystic change include meningioma and schwannoma.
The differential for cysts without nodular/thick enhancement includes nonneoplastic entities, such as
arachnoid, dermoid, epidermoid, neuroenteric, pineal, colloid, neuroglial, choroidal fissure, hippocampal
sulcus remnant, porencephalic, and parasitic cysts.
GLIAL CELLS
Overview of glial cells
A glioma is a primary CNS tumor that arises from a glial cell. Glial cells include astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes, ependymal cells, and choroid plexus cells.
Astrocyte
The normal functions of an astrocyte are to provide biochemical support to the endothelial
cells which maintain the blood-brain barrier, to maintain extracellular ion balance, and to aid
in repair after a neuronal injury.
Astrocytes are normally located throughout the entire brain (primarily in the white matter)
and spinal cord.
Oligodendrocyte
The normal function of an Oligodendrocyte is to maintain myelin around CNS axons. A single
oligodendrocyte can maintain the myelin of dozens of axons.
The counterpart in the peripheral nervous system is the Schwann cell, which maintains myelin around a
single peripheral nerve. Unlike the oligodendrocyte, each Schwann cell is in charge of only a single axon.- Oligodendrocytes are normally located throughout the entire brain and spinal cord.
Ependymal cells
The normal function of an ependymal cell is to circulate CSF with its multiple cilia.
Ependymal cells line the ventricles and central canal of the spinal cord. Choroid plexus cells
are modified ependymal cells that function in producing CSF; they are located in specific
locations as described earlier in the chapter.
Neuro Brain: 707