GASTROINTESTINAL (GI) BLEEDING
Upper GI bleeding
Endoscopy is the best initial procedure for acute upper GI bleeding, defined as above the
ligament of Treitz. Endoscopy can be both diagnostic and therapeutic.
If the patient failed endoscopic attempts at hemostasis or is too unstable for evaluation
by endoscopy, IR embolization can be considered as long as a clear bleed is seen on pre-
procedure CTA or on endoscopy.
In some cases, empiric embolization of a gastric artery or the gastroduodenal artery may be
considered if the angiogram is negative due to the copious collaterals between the celiac
axis and the SMA. However, lower GI collaterals are much less well developed and there is a
significant risk of bowel infarct with indiscriminate lower GI embolization.
Lower GI bleeding
For lower GI bleeding, a hemodynamically stable patient should first be evaluated by
mesenteric CT angiogram or nuclear medicine tagged red blood cell scan to localize the
bleed, as these tests are thought to be more sensitive than angiography. A bleeding rate of
0.5-1.0 mL/min is generally required to be angiographically positive.
A tagged red blood cell scan can detect bleeding rate as low as 0.2-0.4 mL/min.
Many institutions now favor mesenteric CT angiography as the first test for evaluation of acute lower GI
bleeding because CT is rapid, easy to perform, and readily available. On CTA, acute bleeding is seen as
contrast extravasation. CTA may be able to detect bleeding rates as low as 0.35 mL/min.
A hemodynamically unstable patient with clinical evidence of current GI bleeding may go
straight to angiography.
Intra-arterial infusion of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) can often control active lower GI
bleeding, but there is a very high rebleeding rate once the infusion is stopped. Vasopressin
is most useful in cases of bleeding from antimesenteric vessels, which are more difficult
to reach directly by catheter. Major complications of vasopressin are seen in up to 20%
including arrhythmia, pulmonary edema, and hypertension.
Vasopressin is directly infused into the SMA or IMA. The dose of vasopressin is 0.2-0.4 units per minute
(100 units mixed in 500 mL saline given at 1 mL/minute), given as a continuous infusion for up to 24 hours.
Vasopressin can only be used for 24 hours before tachyphylaxis (lack of further response) develops.
IR: 610