CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
Historically, increased focal gallium uptake in the liver suggests hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Conversely, HCC is extremely unlikely if gallium uptake is diminished.
Combined gallium and thallium imaging
Kaposi sarcoma is thallium-avid, but does not take up gallium. Mnemonic: KaT (Kaposi is
Thallium-avid).
Tuberculosis and atypical mycobacteria take up gallium but not thallium. This is the opposite
of Kaposi sarcoma. Mnemonic: TuG (Tuberculosis is Gallium-avid).
Lymphoma takes up both gallium and thallium. Mnemonic: Lymphoma likes both.
Osteomyelitis
A positive triple-phase Tc-99m MDP bone scan is only specific for osteomyelitis if the
radiograph is normal. If there is an underlying abnormality, SPECT/CT, gallium or WBC scan
can increase specificity.
Gallium imaging can increase specificity of a positive bone scan, especially for vertebral
osteomyelitis and discitis.
A WBC scan (typically with Indium-111) can increase specificity in evaluation of an infected
orthopedic prosthesis, where scanning is typically performed in conjunction with Tc-99m
sulfur colloid. When comparing the two scans (WBC and sulfur colloid), a discordant region
with increased WBC tracer uptake and decreased sulfur colloid uptake is suggestive of
marrow replacement by WBCS, consistent with osteomyelitis. Conversely, a region of normal
marrow would be expected to demonstrate uptake both by WBCs and sulfur colloid.
Adrenal pheochromocytoma
I-123 MIBG is generally considered the first-line agent for evaluation of adrenal
pneochromocytoma. Indium-111 pentetreotide can be considered as a second-line agent if
the MIBG scan is negative, though the normal renal uptake of pentetreotide may obscure an
adrenal lesion.
Extra-adrenal pheochromorytoma
The sensitivity of I-123 MIBG for detection of extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma (i.e.,
paraganglioma or glomus tumor) ranges from 63-100%, with potential loss of MIBG uptake
seen in tumor cell dedifferentiation, altered membrane transport proteins, or interference
by medications. Indium-111 pentetreotide is also an option.
The role of F-18 FDG PET in the evaluation of metastatic extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma
is evolving. Most tumors are FDG-avid.
Nucs: 483