CT evaluation of stones (continued)
Dual-energy CT can be used to differentiate the chemical composition of urinary stones, and
in turn, provide useful information for clinical management.
The soft tissue rim sign helps to distinguish a phlebolith from a ureteral stone. The presence
of a small amount of soft tissue surrounding the calcification, thought to represent the
edematous ureteral wall, favors a ureteral stone.
Secondary signs of ureteral obstruction include psilateral hydronephrosis and perinephric
stranding.
Right obstructive uropathy caused by a distal ureteral stone: Noncontrast axial CT through the kidneys (left
image) shows unilateral right hydronephrosis (red arrow). Axial image through the pelvis shows a calcification
along the expected course of the right ureter (yellow arrow) demonstrating the soft tissue rim sign, with a faint
halo of soft tissue surrounding the calculus.
Sonographic evaluation of stones and hydronephrosis
Ultrasound is a fast and inexpensive way to evaluate for nephrolithiasis and hydronephrosis.
An echogenic shadowing focus in the kidney, ureter or bladder is suspicious for a stone,
particularly when associated with twinkling artifact.
After diagnosing a renal or ureteral calculus, assess for the presence of hydronephrosis and
perinephric fluid.
Resistive index (RI) may be helpful in diagnosing obstruction.
RI can be elevated in acute obstruction.
Iti is calculated with pulse-width Doppler of the renal segmental or arcuate arteries.
RI = (PSV = EDV)/PSV
PSV = peak systolic velocity
EDV = end-diastolic velocity
Higher resistive indices correlate with higher resistance.
With no diastolic flow, RI = PSV/PSV = 1
Reversal of diastolici flow technically causes RI >1, although in such cases RI is not measured.
A RI of >0.7 on the affected side, or a difference of >0.1 between kidneys, suggests acute obstruction.
Bilateral elevated Ris (>0.7) are nonspecific and can be due to any number of medical renal processes.
RI is not used to diagnose chronic obstruction.
GU: 251