Fibrovascular polyp
A fibrovascular polyp is a pedunculated mass composed of mesenchymal elements with a
significant fatty component. In contrast to an esophageal adenoma, there is no malignant
potential.
Fibrovascular polyps usually occur in the cervical esophagus where they gradually elongate.
Clinical presentation can be dramatic with regurgitation of a fleshy mass.
CT is usually diagnostic demonstrating an intralesional fatty component.
Inflammatory polyp
An inflammatory polyp is a non-neoplastic, enlarged gastric mucosal fold that protrudes up
into the lower esophagus. Inflammatory polyps are almost always associated with reflux and
must be contiguous with a gastric fold.
Varices
Barium esophagram (left image) demonstrates oblique extrinsic impression along the left anterolateral distal
esophagus (red arrow). Coronal contrast-enhanced CT (right image) demonstrates extensive bulky esophageal
varices. Note this patient also has cirrhotic liver with ascites, presumably the etiology of portal hypertension.
Varices can usually be distinguished from a solid mass on fluoroscopy since varices change
in size and shape with peristalsis and Valsalva maneuver. However, thrombosed varices may
mimic a tumor.
Uphill varices are most common, due to portal hypertension, affecting the distal esophagus.
Blood flows "uphill" from the portal vein 1 left gastric (coronary vein) - periesophageal venous plexus 1
azygos/hemiazygos collaterals 1 SVC.
Downhill varices are less common, due to superior vena cava obstruction, usually affecting
the proximal esophagus.
Enlarged collateral vessels include the supreme intercostal veins (drain the first intercostal space),
bronchial veins, and inferior thyroidal veins.
Foregut duplication cysts
Esophageal duplication cysts are lined with squamous epithelium, have a smooth muscle
wall, and are usually in the posterior mediastinum. They may be either extrinsic to the
esophagus or submucosal; the latter is impossible to differentiate from a leiomyoma by
esophagram.
Bronchogenic cysts are lined by respiratory epithelium and are usually in the middle
mediastinum. They are generally indistinguishable from an esophageal duplication cyst on
esophagram and CT.
Neurenteric cysts are associated with vertebral body anomalies.
GI: 178