CSF leak
CSF leak is a complication seen in 11-45% of temporal bone fractures and is seen 2-4 times
more frequently in otic capsule-violating temporal bone features.
CSF leak is seen in fractures that involve the tegmen.
Clinically, patients present with CSF otorrhea and rhinorrhea, fullness in the ear, and
conductive hearing loss.
Most cases occur in the first week after trauma and resolve with conservative medical
management (strict bed rest).
Labyrinthitis ossificans
Labyrinthitis ossificans occurs when fluid-filled lumen of the otic capsule following trauma is
replaced by fibrous tissue (earlier stage) or bone (later stage).
Clinically this presents with sensorineural hearing loss and loss of vestibular function.
Vascular injury
Arterial injury can occur in the form of dissection, pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula,
transection or occlusion.
Presence of carotid canal fracture is highly suggestive of injury to the passing internal carotid
artery and should be evaluated with CT angiography.
Venous injury can manifest as venous sinus thrombosis or transection. CT venogram should
be performed in cases where the fracture line traverses the venous sinuses. Complications
of venous sinus thrombosis such as venous infarcts or hematomas should also prompt
definitive evaluation.
PETROUS APEX
Anatomy of the petrous apex
The petrous apex is the most medial portion of the temporal bone
The petrous apex is a bridge between the suprahyoid neck inferiorly and the intracranial
compartment above, and is adjacent to several important structures such as Dorello's canal,
Meckel's cave, and the petrous portion of the internal carotid artery.
Cranial nerve VI passes through Dorello's canal.
Meckel's cave is the site of the trigeminal ganglion.
Normally, the petrous apex is composed of bone marrow and dense bone. The petrous
apex is pneumatized in approximately 10% of the population, which increases the risk for
development of a cholesterol cyst or apical petrositis.
Cholesterol cyst (cholesterol granuloma)
A cholesterol cyst is a foreign body giant cell reaction to cholesterol crystals. It is thought
to be initially instigated as a reaction to an obstructed air cell and therefore occurs more
commonly in a pneumatized petrous apex.
A cholesterol cyst is the most common primary petrous apex lesion but may also occur in
the mastoid portion of the temporal bone or the middle ear.
MR imaging of a cholesterol cyst shows an expansile mass with internal hemorrhage and
fluid which does not suppress on fat suppression, unlike fatty marrow.
Congenital cholesteatoma
While acquired cholesteatomas are located within the middle ear, congenital cholesteatoma
can be located anywhere in the temporal bone, including the petrous apex.
MR imaging will typically show restricted diffusion.
Neuro Head & Neck: 830