Cholesteatoma
Middle ear cholesteatoma: Coronal (left image) and axial noncontrast CT through the right temporal bone
demonstrates a soft tissue mass (yellow arrows) in the middle ear with near-complete erosion of the scutum
(red arrow) and the ossicles, consistent with a cholesteatoma. There is opacification of the mastoid air cells.
Case courtesy Mary Beth Cunnane, MD, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary.
Cholesteatoma is a mass of exfoliated keratin lined by squamous epithelium in the temporal
bone, which has been described as "skin in the wrong place." The name cholesteatoma is
deceptive since the lesion does not contain cholesterol crystals or fat and is not neoplastic.
The histologically identical intracranial counterpart is the epidermoid cyst.
Cholesteatomas are among the causes of conductive hearing loss and of a white mass in the
middle ear.
Cholesteatomas are classified by etiology into acquired and congenital forms but they are
histologically identical.
Acquired cholesteatoma represents the vast majority of cholesteatomas and can occur in both children
and adults. Primary acquired cholesteatoma occurs in the setting of a tympanic membrane retraction
pocket, which may be due to Eustachian tube dysfunction. Secondary acquired cholesteatoma occurs
in the setting of tympanic membrane perforation, which may be due to chronic otitis media, trauma, or
surgery.
Congenital cholesteatoma is uncommon and likely represents persistent fetal epithelial rests. They
typically present in children without al history of tympanic membrane perforation, retraction, or surgery.
The vast majority of cholesteatomas occur in the middle ear, although congenital
cholesteatomas may also occur elsewhere in the temporal bone (e.g., EAC, mastoid, petrous
apex).
Acquired cholesteatomas most commonly arise in the Prussak space, a part of the epitympanum lateral
to the neck of the malleus; these are known as pars flaccida cholesteatomas.
In contrast, acquired pars tensa cholesteatomas. and congenital middle ear cholesteatomas are typically
medial to the ossicles.
CT is sensitive for the detection of even a small cholesteatoma, which appears as a
wel-circumscribed soft tissue mass opacifying part of the middle ear cavity. However,
opacification is nonspecific and may reflect effusion, granulation tissue, or fibrosis. Adjacent
bony erosion, such as the wall of the middle ear cavity (earliest involving the scutum in pars
flaccida cholesteatomas) or ossicles (most commonly the long process of the incus), favors
cholesteatoma.
Erosions of bone covering specific structures outside the middle ear cavity are important to identify sO
that they may be protected during cholesteatoma surgery: Lateral semicircular canal, facial nerve, and
intracranial compartment (e.g., tegmen tympani, sigmoid plate).
Neuro Head & Neck: 816