Duplex collecting system (continued)
Although hydronephrosis in an obstructed upper pole system would be apparent on
ultrasound, a completely obstructed system may not be seen on VCUG at all since contrast
cannot flow retrograde into the obstructed ureter. The drooping lily sign is seen on VCUG
where the "invisible" obstructed upper moiety compresses the refluxed contrast in the
lower moiety collecting system.
The differential diagnosis of a drooping lily is renal ptosis, which would be expected to show a normal
number of calyces. In contrast, the obstructed upper pole of the drooping lily has fewer calyces.
Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction
Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction is the most common congenital anomaly of the
genitourinary tract in neonates and the most common cause of unilateral hydronephrosis in
children. UPJ obstruction may be caused by abnormal development of the upper segment of
the ureter, an aberrant renal artery compressing the ureter, an aperistaltic segment of the
ureter, or can be idiopathic.
Imaging shows hydronephrosis and dilated renal pelvis, with normal caliber distal ureter.
Ureterovesical (UVJ) obstruction
Ureterovesical (UV) obstruction is more rare and can be a result of several etiologies, most
commonly megaureter in a single-system kidney or a ureterocele in the setting of ectopic
ureteral insertion.
A ureterocele is focal dilation of the distal ureter within the bladder wall, where the ureter
infolds between the mucosal and muscular layers of the bladder wall.
An ectopic ureterocele is almost always associated with ectopic insertion of the upper pole
ureter in a duplicated system. A simple ureterocele is seen with an orthotopically (normally)
inserting ureter.
The typical ultrasound appearance of an ectopic ureterocele is a cystic lesion within the
bladder wall, usually associated with hydroureter and hydronephrosis of an obstructed
upper pole moiety in a duplex system. Ectopic ureteroceles are almost always located
inferior and medial to the lower pole ureteral insertion site.
VCUG typically shows the ureterocele as a rounded filling defect. The cobra head sign can be
seen on IVP or ultrasound.
Posterior urethral valves (PUV)
Posterior urethral valve is the most common cause of congenital bladder outlet obstruction,
occurring exclusively in boys. It is caused by an obstructing web in the posterior (prostatic)
urethra at the base of the verumontanum.
Ultrasound shows dilation of the posterior (prostatic) urethra, a dilated and trabeculated
bladder, and bilateral hydronephrosis. The appearance of the dilated posterior urethra and
dilated bladder produces the characteristic keyhole appearance on ultrasound.
Calyceal rupture may occur, resulting in perinephric fluid collections, urinomas and ascites.
The main differential consideration is prune belly syndrome, which would show dilation of
the entire ureter rather than only the prostatic portion.
Prune belly syndrome
Prune belly, or Eagle Barrett, syndrome is a congenital muscular disorder that affects the
abdominal wall musculature and the smooth muscles of the entire urinary tract.
Prune belly may be associated with cryptorchidism, as bladder distension interferes with the
descent of testes.
The muscular defect leads to dilation of the entire collecting system, including bladder and
both ureters. In contrast to posterior urethral valves, the entire urethra is dilated.
Peds: 1147