OSSEOUS METASTASIS
Osseous metastases are over 10 times more common than primary bone tumors.
Most metastases occur in the red bone marrow, most commonly in the axial skeleton.
It can be difficult to differentiate a pathologic vertebral body fracture (associated with
an underlying tumor) from an osteoporotic fracture, but involvement of the pedicle or
posterior vertebral body suggests metastasis.
A fracture of the lesser trochanter in an adult should raise concern for pathologic fracture.
A solitary sternal lesion is highly predictive of metastasis in a patient with breast cancer.
Lytic osseous metastases
Blastic (sclerotic) osseous metastases
Lung (most common purely lytic).
Breast (lytic or blastic).
Breast (lytic or blastic).
Prostate, seminoma.
Thyroid.
Transitional cell carcinoma.
Kidney.
Mucinous tumors.
Stomach, colon (lytic or blastic).
Carcinoid.
BENIGN TUMOR MIMICS
Myositis ossificans
Myositis ossificans:
Lateral radiograph of the elbow shows peripheral
osteoid within a mass abutting the anterior
humeral cortex. The peripheral ossification
(arrows) suggests myositis ossificans, at least 5
weeks old.
The main differential diagnosis is parosteal
osteosarcoma; however, the peripheral
ossification more strongly suggests myositis
ossificans. This case was followed and confirmed
by close-interval follow-up imaging.
Myositis ossificans (MO) is heterotopic bone formation in the skeletal muscle secondary to
trauma, although the history of trauma may not be remembered and the trauma may be
minor. MO most commonly occurs around the elbow and thigh, which are prone to trauma.
Myositis ossificans may mimic parosteal osteosarcoma. Parosteal osteosarcoma is usually
more heavily calcified centrally, while myositis ossificans is typically more calcified
peripherally.
If myositis ossificans is suspected, a biopsy should not be performed. A biopsy can lead to
unnecessary surgery, as the histology may resemble sarcoma.
The appearance of myositis ossificans evolves over a period of weeks to months:
Weeks 1-2: Soft-tissue mass only.
Weeks 3-4: Formation of amorphous osteoid matrix. May cause periosteal reaction of adjacent bone.
This stage is most suggestive of an early osteosarcoma.
Weeks 5-8: The periphery of the lesion matures into compact bone.
Up to 6 months: Ossification continues to mature.
>6 months: Typically decreases in size.
MSK: 959