Less common thymic lesions
Thymic carcinoma
Unlike thymoma, thymic carcinoma is histologically malignant, very aggressive, and often metastasizes
hematogenously to lungs, liver, brain, and bone. Prognosis is poor.
Distinction between invasive thymoma and thymic carcinoma is difficult byi imaging alone.
Thymic cyst
A thymic cyst may be secondary to radiation therapy (e.g., administered to treat Hodgkin disease),
associated with AIDS or: Sjogren's syndrome (especially when multilocular), or congenital arising from
remnants of the thymopharyngeal duct. A congenital thymic cyst may occur anywhere along the course of
thymic descent from the neck, but most commonly in the prevascular mediastinum.
CT shows a simple fluid-attenuation cyst in the prevascular mediastinum, typically centrally located. It may
measure greater than simple fluid if it contains proteinaceous or hemorrhagic contents. Cystic nature can
be confirmed with MRI.
Thymolipoma
Thymolipoma is a benign fat-containing lesion with interspersed soft tissue. It may become quite large and
drape over the mediastinum.
Thymic hyperplasia
Thymic hyperplasia appears as diffuse symmetric gland enlargement without focal mass.
True thymic hyperplasia is a reaction to systemic stressors such as radiation therapy, burns, chemotherapy,
and steroids.
Lymphoid hyperplasia is associated with myasthenia gravis, SLE, RA, scleroderma, and Grave's disease.
Germ cell tumor (GCT)
Several different types of GCTS may arise in the prevascular mediastinum from primitive
germ cell elements.
Teratoma is the most common mediastinal germ cell tumor, usually encapsulated and
often predominantly cystic in nature, but fat and calcification are common. A fat/fluid
level is specific for teratoma, but is not commonly seen. Teratoma can rarely be malignant,
especially if there is a large soft tissue component.
Teratoma: Chest radiograph shows an extra mediastinal contour (yellow arrow) lateral to the aortic arch
(red arrow). Because the mass does not silhouette the aorta it cannot be in the middle mediastinum. On
CT there is a mediastinal mass containing a large focus of fat (yellow arrow) likely representing a benign
teratoma.
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Seminoma is the most common malignant prevascular mediastinal germ cell tumor. It
occurs almost exclusively in men 10 to 39 years old. Pleural effusions are rare but pulmonary
metastases are relatively common.
Chest: 75