Inflammatory carcinoma (continued)
On mammography, the affected breast is larger and denser, with trabecular thickening and
skin thickening. Occasionally, no discrete mass will be apparent. The primary differential
consideration is mastitis, which can often be differentiated in the clinical setting.
Paget disease of the nipple
malignant cells in
nipple
Paget disease of the nipple is
areola
the epidermis
a form of DCIS that infiltrates
the epidermis of the nipple.
Clinically, Paget disease of
duct
the nipple presents with
involved
lactiferous
erythema, ulceration, and
by DCIS
duct
eczematoid changes of the
nipple.
Breast cancer prognosis
In non-metastatic invasive breast cancer, axillary lymph node status is the most important
prognostic factor, with the absence of nodal involvement offering the highest likelihood of
cure. Survival is progressively worse with increased number of involved axillary nodes.
The primary method to detect axillary involvement is a surgical sentinel lymph node biopsy, with a
sensitivity of 93%. Sentinel lymph node biopsy is not routinely performed for DCIS unless necrosis or
microinvasive disease is present.
Alternatively, surgical axillary lymph node dissection has a 99%: sensitivity for detecting lymph node
involvement. Lymph node dissection is performed if the sentinel lymph node is positive or not identified.
Women with positive lymph nodes or with large tumors may benefiti from neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
The presence of tumor receptors affects prognosis. Patients with estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) positive tumors have longer disease-free survival.
Cancers with HER2/neu overexpression may respond to the monoclonal antibody trastuzamab (brand
name Herceptin) or tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as lapatinib.
Triple-negative cancers are ER, PR, and HER2/neu negative, and the majority are biologically
aggressive with poor prognosis. Triple-negative cancers account for the majority of breast
cancers in patients with BRCA1 mutation. On imaging, they may show features more typical
of benign lesions despite their aggressive nature.
Tomosynthesis (left image) and targeted ultrasound (right image) show a large oval, circumscribed mass with
heterogeneous echotexture and posterior acoustic enhancement (not shown). Although these are typically
benign mammographic and sonographic features, this mass also demonstrated internal vascularity on Doppler
imaging and had rapid growth per patient history, prompting a biopsy which showed triple-negative invasive
ductal carcinoma.
Breast: 372