BENIGN ENDOMETRIAL PATHOLOGY
Endometrial polyp
An endometrial polyp can cause mucous discharge or irregular vaginal bleeding between
cycles. Most endometrial polyps are benign, but larger polyps (>1.5 cm) occurring in
postmenopausal patients may have malignant potential.
Ultrasound shows a focal nodular area of endometrial thickening, often with a feeding vessel
or internal flow by Doppler. A polyp is more definitively diagnosed by sonohysterogram,
where saline is instilled into the uterus prior to transvaginal ultrasound.
Endometrial lhyperplasi./metaplasic
Endometrial hyperplasia refers to abnormal proliferation of the endometrial glands and
stroma. It can be seen in all age groups. It typically presents as abnormal uterine bleeding.
Hyperplasia occurs due to unopposed estrogen stimulation, and can have various causes
(obesity, polycystic ovary syndrome, pregnancy, estrogen-secreting ovarian tumors, and
tamoxifen).
Endometrial hyperplasia is typically diagnosed by ultrasound. The imaging findings
are nonspecific but can include smooth endometrial thickening and/or cystic changes.
Hyperplasia, metaplasia, or carcinoma cannot be reliably distinguished by imaging.
In premenopausal. women, evaluation is based on clinical symptoms, in particular, abnormal uterine
bleeding. Endometrial thickness varies with the menstrual cycle and is a poor predictor for endometrial
pathology.
In post-menopausal women, endometrial thickness in combination with clinical picture (symptoms,
medications) can prompt further workup including biopsy and/or hysteroscopy. Refer to the chart below
for more detail.
Management of uniform (non-focal) post-menopausal endometrial thickness (ET)
<5r mm
w 5 mm
no further workup
bleeding
no bleeding
(low malignancy risk)
*if bleeding, likely due to atrophy
*ACOG uses 4 mm
ET<8mm
8sETK11mm
w 11 mm
no workup
recommendation
needs workup
varies by group
(+) medications
no medications
that alter endometrium
needs workup
tamoxifen
HRT
needs workup
(tamoxifen increases
ET<8mm
w 8 mm
risk of endometrial cancer)
recommendation
needs workup
varies by group
*if cyclic, repeat exam off HRT
*The ET cutoff for further workup of post-menopausal bleeding varies by institution. For example,
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) use 4 mm instead of 5 mm.
The above management approach can only be used if the entire endometrial lining is visualized.
Focal endometrial thickening requires workup regardless of thickness.
GU: 303