Intraductal papilloma (continued)
Solitary papillomas are the most common cause of pathologic (bloody, serous, or
serosanguinous) nipple discharge. They grow on a fibrovascular stalk and torsion of the stalk
can cause pain and bleeding. Note that DCIS may also present with bloody nipple discharge.
The mammographic appearance of a papilloma includes a round or oval, predominantly
circumscribed mass, a tubular structure/focally dilated duct, and calcifications, either alone
or in association with a mass or dilated duct.
The majority of papillomas that present with nipple discharge are mammographicaly occult,
but if visible on imaging are usually in the more anterior, retroareolar region.
On ultrasound, a papilloma may appear as a round or oval hypoechoic or complex cystic
mass. When causing nipple discharge, the papilloma may be evident as an isoechoic or
hypoechoic mass in a fluid-filled duct.
In patients presenting with nipple discharge with no visible findings on mammography or
ultrasound, galactography or contrast-enhanced MRI may be utilized for further evaluation.
Galactography can demonstrate a filling defect within the opacified discharging duct. MRI
may show an intraductal enhancing mass with washout kinetics. The duct may be filled with
fluid (T2 hyperintense) or blood (T1 hyperintense on pre-contrast). Papillomas may also
present as an enhancing focus or round or oval mass, often with wash-out kinetics.
Follow-up of biopsied benign papilloma (without atypia) is controversial. For papillomas
with atypia or other suspicious features, surgical excision is recommended.
Breast cancer
It is uncommon for breast carcinoma to be circumscribed, but a new circumscribed mass
must prompt suspicion especially in a post-menopausal woman.
Several subtypes of breast cancer that can present as a round or oval, circumscribed mass
on mammography include triple negative breast cancer, medullary, mucinous, and papillary
carcinoma.
Metastasis
A: solitary metastasis to the breast is much more frequently seen than multiple metastases.
A hematogenous metastasis most commonly presents as a circumscribed round mass.
Melanoma and renal cell carcinoma have a propensity to metastasize to the breast.
CC mammogram (left image) shows a high-density, round, circumscribed mass in the inner breast. Targeted
ultrasound shows a complex cystic and solid mass with angular and indistinct margins (arrows). Biopsy
revealed metastatic melanoma.
Breast: 419