Renogram (continued)
Differential (or split) renal function is determined during the cortical phase by counting the
% activity in each kidney, which should be equal. Normal range is 45-55% for each kidney.
Cortical transit of radiotracer can be quantified by the 20 minute-to-peak ratio, which
describes the percentage of maximal cortical activity remaining in each kidney at 20 minutes
after injection. A ratio <0.3 is normal. Delayed transit reflects renal dysfunction.
Lasix renogram (diuretic renography)
If hydronephrosis is present, a diuretic renogram can distinguish between obstruction and a
nonobstructive cause of collecting system dilation. Both renal function and urodynamics are
evaluated. The radiotracer is Tc-99m MAG3, much less commonly Tc-99m DTPA.
After approximately 20 minutes of imaging, 40 mg IVi furosemide (Lasix) is administered.
A higher dose may be needed in patients with renal insufficiency. After infection, a fixed
mechanical obstruction will show no change in the renogram curve. However, in a non-
obstructive case, the additional pressure from diuretic effect will open up the collecting
system and allow drainage of radiotracer from the kidney.
Lasix injection
mechanical
obstruction
After administration of Lasix, a
clearance half-time <10 minutes
-
is normal.
#
10-20 minutes is indeterminant.
non-obstructive
>20 minutes suggests obstruction.
hydronephrosis
Normal
time (minutes)
False positives (Lasix renogram is positive for obstruction in the absence of a true
obstruction) can be seen within dehydration, distended bladder, or renal failure (decreased
response to diuretics).
Ethacrynic acid is an alternative diuretic to Lasix in patients with sulfa allergies, though in
practice Lasix is only associated with negligible risk of adverse reactions in these patients.
Angiotensin-onverting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor renogram
A positive ACE renogram is relatively specific for renal artery stenosis, which may be a cause
of hypertension. The radiotracer is Tc-99m MAG3, much less commonly Tc-99m DTPA.
In compensated renal artery stenosis, decreased blood to the glomerulus stimulates renin 1
angiotensin I 1 angiotensin II. Angiotensin II constricts the efferent (outgoing) arterioles to
restore GFR. Angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin converting enzyme.
decreasedi inflow in
renin-angiotensin: system compensates by
renal artery stenosis
constricting efferent arteriole to maintain GFR
afferent arteriole
efferent arteriole
glomerulus
Bowman's: space
proximal
tubule
Nucs: 478