Transarterial radioembolization (TARE)
TARE, also called selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT), consists of intra-arterial infusion
of microspheres with radioactive isotopes (i.e., Yttrium-90).
TARE does not have the same macro-embolic effects as TACE. Treatment effect depends on
radiation emitted by the spheres which induce tumor necrosis. Intra-arterial administration
allows for targeted delivery of high radiation dose to the tumor than can be given via
external beam radiation.
Due to less disruption of vessels, TARE can be performed in the setting of portal vein
thrombosis.
Absolute contraindications include: pregnancy, breastfeeding, uncorrectable GI vascular
reflux, and uncorrectable hepatopulmonary shunting.
TARE procedure is similar to TACE except for a few differences as below:
After angiography to map out the anatomy, labeled macroaggregates of albumin (MAA) are injected,
followed by a nuclear medicine study to confirm tracer uptake.
The distribution of MAA is similar to that of the radioembolization microspheres, which allows mapping,
calculation of dose, and evaluation for potential extrahepatic shunt or nontarget embolization (i.e., uptake
in lungs, GI, skin).
TARE should NEVER be performed when there is a shunt to the GI tract, because even small amounts can
cause enteritis or ulceration.
To prevent nontarget embolization, coil embolization of nearby arteries can be performed.
TARE does NOT cause significant post-embolization syndrome.
Portal vein embolization
Portal vein embolization is typically performed prior to partial hepatectomy.
Blood supply is redirected to the future liver remnant (FLR) which causes hypertrophy.
Most commonly, target for embolization is the right lobe.
Right hepatic lobe is usually large enough to maintain function after left hepatectomy.
The portal vein is accessed percutaneously.
Contraindications: Patients with portal hypertension or extensive ipsilateral tumor thrombus
should not undergo portal vein embolization due to risk of altered hemodynamics and
massive tumoral necrosis.
RENAL NEOPLASMS AND ANGIOMYOUIPOMA
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
Most renal cell carcinomas (RCC) are hypervascular. The tumors often feature arteriovenous
shunting and venous lakes, with a classic angiographic appearance of bizarre neovascularity.
Radiofrequency ablation has been a successful minimally invasive treatment for RCC in
patients who are not good operative candidates.
Oncocytoma
Oncocytoma is a benign renal mass that cannot be reliably distinguished from renal cell
carcinoma on cross-sectional imaging.
Angiography classically shows a spokewheel appearance with a peritumoral halo. In contrast
to RCC, bizarre neoplastic vessels are absent.
IR: 641