Chronic arterial occlusive disease (continued)
An ankle-brachial index (ABI) should be performed in every patient with suspected
arterial occlusive disease. The ABI is the ratio of systolic blood pressure (SBP) in the ankles
compared to the arms, and is calculated as: ankle SBP/brachial SBP.
A decreased ABI suggests a hemodynamically significant stenosis between the great vessels and the ankles
since the ankle blood pressure is less than the upper extremity blood pressure.
An ABI <0.9 is abnormal. An ABI between 0.5 and 0.9 usually correlates with intermittent claudication.
Rest pain is usually present with an ABI <0.4.
Pulse-volume recordings characterize the Doppler waveform at multiple levels. The
anatomic location of a lesion can be deduced by the change from a normal triphasic
waveform to a biphasic (moderate stenosis) or flat waveform (severe stenosis/0cclusion),
For anatomical mapping and to confirm ABI and ultrasound findings, CTA or MRA can be
done for further characterization.
CTA can detect luminal narrowing or irregularities, and occlusion due to calcified and non-
calcified plaques. However, blooming artifact from the calcified plaque can limit assessment
of the arteries below the knee.
MRA plays an important role in the diagnosis of PAD. Particularly, time-resolved MRA, which
obtains a series of images while the contrast is passing through the calves, can demonstrate
occlusion or stenosis and complements the conventional MRA images.
Recently, noncontrast MRA sequence-quiescent interval single shot (QISS) technique has
been used clinically with high diagnostic accuracy compared to DSA, while being less prone
to artifact than CTA.
Acute thromboembolic disease
Acute limb ischemia is an emergency, with a very different clinical and imaging presentation
compared to chronic atherosclerotic disease. In acute thromboembolic disease, symptom
onset is acute, with pain, pallor, poikilothermia (coldness), pulselessness, and paresthesias.
Blue toe syndrome is acute thromboembolism in the toes.
The most common embolic source is a left atrial thrombus, with atrial fibrillation a
significant risk factor. Echocardiography is indicated in the workup.
CTA or MRA shows an acute cutoff of the affected vessel with a filling defect at the level of
the vessel bifurcation. On MRA, filling defect will appear hypointense with mild perivascular
Typerenhancement due to inflammation. Significant atherosclerotic disease may be absent.
Treatment options include surgical embolectomy, surgical bypass graft, and endovascular
thrombolysis.
Acute thromboembolic disease: A COVID-19 patient presented
with acute limb ischemia. CTA revealed acute thrombus in the
left lower extremity and abrupt non-opacification of the left
common iliac and external iliac arteries (arrows).
Vascular: 582