Choroid plexus tumors
Choroid plexus papilloma: Axial
T2-weighted image shows a
hyperintense, cauliflower-
like mass (arrows) in the left
cerebellomedullary fissure deforming
the medulla. The center of the mass
is at the foramen of Luschka, which is
likely its location of origin.
Case courtesy Sanjay Prabhu, MD,
Boston Children's Hospital.
Choroid plexus tumors consist of, in decreasing frequency, choroid plexus papilloma (WHO
grade 1), atypical choroid plexus papilloma (grade 2), and choroid plexus carcinoma (grade
3). These are not reliably distinguishable on imaging.
Choroid plexus papilloma most commonly occurs in infants and young children, but it may
also occur in adults.
Choroid plexus tumors arise from choroid plexus epithelium and are therefore entirely
intraventricular in location.
In children, the atrium of the lateral ventricle is the most common location.
In adults, the fourth ventricle is the most common location.
Less commonly, choroid plexus papilloma may arise from the third ventricle or cerebellomedullary angle,
as in the case shown.
The characteristic appearance on MRI is a caulflower-like intraventricular mass that avidly
enhances. Higher grade is associated with larger size and more extensive surrounding white
matter edema.
Chordoid glioma
Chordoid glioma is a rare WHO grade 2 glial tumor that arises from ependymal cells of the
lamina terminalis.
The tumor is distinctively located in the anterior third ventricle, associated with the
hypothalamus.
Chordoid glioma is a circumscribed, ovoid, homogeneously enhancing mass that is
hyperattenuating on CT and slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI.
Colloid cyst
Colloid cysts are benign developmental lesions that are usually incidental findings and
account for the most common mass of the foramina of Monro.
Colloid cyst is a circumscribed, nonenhancing lesion characteristically arising from the
anterior roof of the third ventricle.
The machine oil-like contents appear hyperattenuating on CT and low signal intensity on T2-
weighted images.
Intraventricular simple cysts
Intraventricular simple cysts include several histologies that may be difficult to
distinguish on imaging, including ependymal cyst, arachnoid cyst (more common in the
subarachnoid space external to the brain), neuroepithela/neurogla cyst (more commonly
intraparenchymal, and choroid plexus cyst (occurring antenatally and regressing at birth).
Simple cysts follow CSF signal on all sequences, including FLAIR, and do not demonstrate
restricted diffusion.
Neuro Brain: 723