Renal cell carcinoma (RCC; continued)
Staging of RCC is based on the Robson system, which characterizes fascial extension and
vascular/lymph node involvement. Stages I-III are usually resectable, although the surgical
approach may need to be altered for venous invasion (stages IIIA and IIIC).
On ultrasound, RCC is usually isoechoic to renal cortex, but can be hypo- or hyperechoic. If
hyperechoic (mimicking AML), imaging features such as a hypoechoic rim and intratumoral
cystic changes favor RCC. Color and spectral Doppler are helpful in differentiating bland
renal vein thrombus (which would not be stage IIIA) from tumor thrombus. Tumor thrombus
will have color Doppler flow with an arterial waveform.
Renal cell carcinoma, stage 3A: Coronal (left image) and axial postcontrast fat-suppressed T1-weighted MRI
(right image) shows a heterogeneously enhancing mass (yellow arrows) replacing and expanding most of the
left kidney. Contiguous to the mass there is expansion and heterogeneous enhancement of the left renal vein
(red arrows), representing tumor thrombus and extension of the renal carcinoma into the renal vein.
Clear cell RCC is the most common subtype (-75%), with 5-year survival of "55%.
Clear cell RCC tends to enhance more avidly than the less common subtypes. Clear cell can be sporadic or
associated with Von Hippel-Lindau.
MRI shows T2 hyperintense signal with marked enhancement.
Papillary RCC is a hypovascular subtype, with a 5-year survival of 80-90%.
Papillary RCC tends to enhance only mildly due to its hypovascularity.
A renal "adenoma" is frequently seen on autopsy specimens and is a papillary carcinoma <5 mm. MRI
shows T2 hypointensity with mild enhancement.
Chromophobe is the subtype with the best prognosis, featuring a 90% 5-year survival.
Sarcomatoid differentiation can occur with subtypes above, resembling sarcoma with an
aggressive behavior and poor prognosis.
The enhancement kinetics can help differentiate the subtypes of RCC.
Enhancement intensity of RCC: subtypes
clear cell
Enhancement characteristics of RCC
subtypes: Clear cell RCC enhancement
chromophobe is the most rapid and highest over time,
thus they may retain contrast on delayed
papillary
images. Papillary RCC has relatively little
8
enhancement.
time
GU: 262