SPINAL CORD MECHANICAL/TRAUMATIC/MISCELLANEOUS LESIONS
Syrinx Syringohydromyeli)
Syrinx and syringonydromyela are collective terms referring to intramedullary cystic lesions
that may represent hydromyelia and/or syringomyelia. Syrinx may rarely also refer to
intracranial variants.
Syringomyelia is a fluid-filled, gliosis-lined cavity within the spinal cord parenchyma that
does not communicate with the central canal.
Hydromyelia is dilatation of the ependymal cell-lined central canal (>2 mm).
The most common congenital cause is Chiari malformations (more often Chiari I). Other
congenital causes include spinal dysraphisms myelomeningocele, tethered cord syndrome)
and Klippel-Feil syndrome.
Acquired causes include hydrocephalus, post-infectious, post-intlammatory, post-traumatic,
and intramedullary tumors (particularly ependymomas and hemangioblastomas).
Of note, minimal dilation of the central canal of less than 2 mm is likely within normal limits.
Compressive myelopathy
Compressive myelopathy refers to neurological deficits related to spinal cord compression.
The most common cause is degenerative disease spondylosis) in the cervical spine. Other
causes include extradural masses.
MRI demonstrates T2 prolongation within the compressed segment of cord.
Traumatic spinal cord injury
MRI is useful to evaluate severity of traumatic injury to the spinal cord and provide
prognosis for functional outcome. Injury can manifest as concussion (normal MRI
appearance), cord edema, hemorrhagic contusion, or cord hematoma.
Spinal cord edema is characterized by abnormal T2 prolongation within the spinal cord, with normal or
low associated T1 signal.
Hemorrhagic contusion appears as a focus of hypointensity surrounded by hyperintensity on T2-weighted
images.
Cord hematoma (poorest prognosis) is al larger (>4 mm) focus of hypointensity surrounded by
hyperintensity on T2-weighted images.
Spinal cord injury is neurologically categorized by whether there is incomplete or complete
sensory and/or motor function loss below a particular level. There are several classic
incomplete cord syndromes:
Central cord syndrome, due to injury around the central canal, is the most common incomplete cord
syndrome and usually results from hyperextension trauma in patients with degenerative cervical spinal
canal stenosis.
Brown-Séquard syndrome, due to a hemicord injury, usually results from penetrating trauma affecting
half the cord.
Ventral/anterior cord syndrome, involving the anterior 2/3 of the cord but sparing dorsal columns,
is most commonly caused by anterior spinal artery ischemia/infarction, but can also be post-traumatic
due to vertebral fracture, disc herniation, or spondylolisthesis.
Conus medullaris and cauda equina syndromes, due to a lesion at the end of the spinal cord or nerve
roots at T12 and below, have various causes including trauma, disc herniation, tumor, and epidural
abscess.
Spine: 870