Acute mesenteric ischemia (continued)
Acute mesenteric ischemia typically presents as catastrophic abdominal pain, often with
lactic acidosis.
Arterial SMA embolism is the most common cause of acute mesenteric ischemia.
An SMA embolism distal to the middle colic artery carries the highest high risk of intestinal ischemia, as
there are few native distal collaterals. The middle colic artery anastomoses with the IMA via the marginal
artery of Drummond and the arc of Riolan.
Acute in situ thrombosis is another cause of mesenteric ischemia that is usually
superimposed on existing atherosclerosis.
Venous thrombosis is a rare cause of acute mesenteric ischemia.
CTA findings of acute mesenteric ischemia include:
Arterial phase images can reveal SMA: stenoses, occlusions, and luminal narrowing.
Delayed or venous phase can reveal venous obstruction as well as bowel and end organ ischemia,
including bowel wall necrosis, pneumatosis intestinalis, and perforation.
Dual-energy CT reconstructions: such as iodine maps and monoenergetic images can help to detect bowel
ischemia, where the ischemic segments have lower iodine concentrations.
Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI) is a highly lethal (70-100% mortality) form of
acute mesenteric ischemia. NOMI is known as "intestinal necrosis with a patent arterial
tree;" however, mesenteric arteries are diffusely attenuated/small in caliber on CTA due to
vasospasm. Bowel ischemia findings are prominent along the watershed areas. In addition,
CT hypoperfusion complex (shock bowel syndrome) features can be seen in the abdomen.
Chronic mesenteric ischemia
Chronic mesenteric ischemia is usually caused by atherosclerosis. The classic clinical
presentation is postprandial abdominal pain out of proportion to the physical exam.
Because mesenteric collaterals are SO extensive, at least two of three mesenteric arteries
(celiac, SMA, and IMA) must be diseased to produce symptoms in chronic disease.
CTA findings include stenosis of the mesenteric vessels, extensive collaterals, bowel wall
thickening and pneumatosis.
Chronic mesenteric ischemia can be treated endovascularly with angioplasty and stenting.
ARTERIAL COMPRESSION SYNDROMES
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS)
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS) is celiac artery compression by the median
arcuate ligament, a part of the diaphragmatic crura. Arterial compression worsens with
expiration.
While most patients are asymptomatic, MALS may clinically present with crampy abdominal
pain. MALS tends to occur in young, thin women.
CTA or MRA shows a proximal stenosis of the celiac axis with hook sign configuration, post-
stenotic dilatation, and collaterals between branches of the gastroduodenal artery and SMA.
Dynamic imaging (expiration and inspiration) can be done to assess severity of the stenosis.
Angioplasty is not effective and stents are controversial due to high risk of device failure.
Definitive treatment is surgical release of the median arcuate ligament to enlarge the
diaphragmatic hiatus.
Vascular: 567