Caesarian section scar implantation
Caesarean section scar is typically located in the low anterior uterine segment. Implantation
of the embryo at this location is not considered an ectopic pregnancy due to being within
the uterus. However, this condition is life-threatening.
Abnormal endometrium at the scar results in invasion of the myometrium by the
trophoblastic tissue, leading to high risk of placenta accreta and associated uterine rupture.
LOGIQ
E9
Sagittal grayscale ultrasound of the
uterus demonstrates a gestational
sac with yolk sac in the anterior lower
uterine segment, centered at the site of
a prior C-section scar.
MISCELLANEOUS FIRST TRIMESTER DISORDERS
Gestational trophoblastic disease
Gestational trophoblastic disease results from abnormal neoplastic overgrowth of the
placental trophoblast and includes a spectrum of benign and malignant entities.
There are three stages of gestational trophoblastic disease: complete hydatidiform mole,
invasive mole, and choriocarcinoma.
Complete hydatidiform mole does not contain any fetal parts. It is caused by loss of the
egg's DNA prior to fertilization by the sperm and has a diploid karyotype of 46,XX (most
commonly) or 46,XY. A complete mole may become invasive and progress to metastatic
choriocarcinoma.
The classic clinical presentation of molar pregnancy is hyperemesis, markedly elevated
B-hCG, and an enlarged uterus. The patient may also present with painless vaginal bleeding.
On ultrasound, molar disease causes uterine enlargement with a classic heterogeneous and
multicystic bunch of grapes appearance. Visualization of fetal parts suggests a partial mole
(see below).
Sagittal grayscale ultrasound of the
uterus demonstrates a large multicystic
mass with internal vascularity (Doppler
not shown) in the endometrial cavity.
The appearance is consistent with
gestational trophoblastic disease.
Molar pregnancy is associated with theca lutein cysts in the ovaries, which arise in response
to elevated B-hCG.
Treatment of a molar pregnancy is endometrial suction curettage and close follow-up of
serum hCG levels for 6 months.
Obstetrics: 331