Testicular microlithiasis
Testicular microlithiasis is the presence of multiple punctate intratesticular calcifications.
There is a controversial association between microlithiasis and testicular neoplasm. While
the overall absolute risk for developing testicular cancer remains very small in the presence
of microlithiasis, the relative risk may be increased.
Current guidelines do not support screening by ultrasound or tumor markers, but patients
with microlithiasis may perform self-examinations and be seen in follow-up as needed.
At least 5 microcalcifications must be present per image to be called microlithiasis. If there
are less than 5 microcalcifications the term limited microlithiasis is used.
Microlithiasis can produce a starry sky appearance if calcifications are numerous.
In the liver, hepatitis can cause a starry sky appearance due to increased echogenicity of the portal triads.
Transverse grayscale ultrasound
shows numerous echogenic foci
within both testes, consistent
with microlithiasis.
Testicular metastases
The most common metastases to the testicles are leukemia and ymphoma, as the relevant
chemotherapeutic agents do not cross the blood-testis barrier.
Hematologic malignancies typically present in older patients, tend to be bilateral, and may
be infiltrative with diffuse testicular enlargement.
Benign testicular tumors
An epidermoid is a keratin-filled cyst with a distinctive onion skin appearance of concentric
alternating rings of hypo- and hyperechogenicity. If suspected, local excision is performed
instead of the standard orchiectomy typically performed for presumed malignant masses.
Sex cord-stromal tumors are 90% benign but are sonographically indistinguishable from
malignant tumors. Orchiectomy is therefore the standard treatment.
Leydig cell tumor can present with gynecomastia due to estrogen secretion.
Sertoli cell tumor is associated with Peutz-Jeghers and Klinefelter syndromes.
Testicular epidermoid: Transverse, grayscale ultrasound (left image) demonstrates a circumscribed,
encapsulated mass in the testicle with peripheral calcification and onion skin appearance. There is no
demonstrable Doppler flow within the mass (right image).
GU: 290