Cavernous sinus
optic nerve
optic chiasm
supraclinoid
carotid
cavernous
CN Ill oculomotor nerve
carotid
pituitary
all extraocular muscles except SO & LR
gland
CN IV trochlear nerve
superior oblique (SO)
CN VI abducens nerve
cavernous
lateral rectus (LR)
sinus
CNV, ophthalmic division
sensory forehead region
sphenoid
sinus
CNV, maxillary division
sensory cheek region
exits foramen rotundum
nasopharynx
CN VI and sympathetic fibers around the carotid artery are located within the center of the cavernous sinus, while
the other cranial nerves travel within the cavernous sinus wall.
The mandibular nerve (V,) is the only segment oft thei trigeminal nerve that does not traverse the cavernous: sinus.
Ite exits inferiorly from Meckel's cave through foramen ovale.
The abducens nerve (VI) enters the petrous portion of the temporal bonet through Dorello's canal and is the only
nerve that travels in the medial venous sinusoids.
The maxillary nerve (V,) is the only nerve of the cavernous sinus that does not exit the superior orbital fissure.
Instead, ite exits foramen rotundum.
The cavernous sinuses are paired dural venous sinuses of the middle cranial fossae on either
side of the sella turcica, connected by the variable intercavernous sinuses.
The cavernous sinus drains the (superior and inferior) ophthalmic veins and sphenoparietal
sinus.
The cavernous sinus is the most frequently involved dural sinus with infection and thrombosis (septic
thrombophlebitis). Infection may spread from the central face ("danger zone"), paranasal sinuses, teeth,
or orbits (discussed previously in the orbital infection section).
The cavernous sinus drains via the superior and inferior petrosal sinuses to the sigmoid sinus
and jugular bulb, respectively. There are also connections to the pterygoid venous plexus
and basilar (Clival) plexus.
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (via the internal jugular vein) is performed to demonstrate pituitary ACTH
hypersecretion in cases of suspected Cushing disease.
The internal carotid artery traverses the cavernous sinus. Rupture results in a direct
caroticocavernous fistula (discussed previously in the ocular trauma section).
The cavernous sinus contains cranial nerves III, IV, VI, V, and V, and sympathetic fibers. CN
VI and sympathetics around the carotid artery are located within the center of the sinus,
while the other cranial nerves course between two dural layers within the lateral wall.
The lateral wall of the cavernous sinus is normally concave or straight. Outward bulging
suggests involvement with a lesion, whether neoplastic, vascular, or inflammatory.
Cavernous sinus syndrome consists of clinical signs and symptoms attributable to cavernous
sinus pathology, particularly neurologic deficits (ophthalmoplegia, facial sensory loss, Horner
syndrome) and orbital/ocular congestion (chemosis, proptosis). Pain/headache may be
present, especially in inflammatory disorders such as Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.
Neuro Head & Neck: 796