Popliteal aneurysm
A popliteal artery aneurysm is defined as a popliteal artery measuring 8 mm or more.
Popliteal aneurysms are almost always due to atherosclerosis and are associated with other
atherosclerotic aneurysms. Approximately 20% of patients with a popliteal aneurysm also
have an aortic aneurysm, and up to half have bilateral popliteal aneurysms.
Popliteal aneurysms are usually asymptomatic. When symptomatic, the typical presenting
symptom is distal ischemia due to embolism. Popliteal aneurysm rupture is rare.
Cross-sectional imaging either with CTA or MRA is important to assess overall size of the
popliteal aneurysm, given the mural thrombus can narrow the lumen.
Treatment with endovascular stent-graft or surgical bypass is recommended for all
symptomatic popliteal artery aneurysms and asymptomatic aneurysms >2 cm in diameter.
NON-ATHEROSCLEROTIC LOWER EXTREMITY ARTERIAL DISEASE
Buerger disease
As previously discussed, Buerger disease or thromboangitis obliterans, is a chronic
inflammatory, thrombotic arteritis which typically occurs in male smokers. It more
commonly involves the legs but may also involve the hands, where it may present with
ischemia, ulcerations, and even gangrene.
On imaging, there are segmental stenoses of the medium and small arteries in the leg, with
typical corkscrew collaterals in the vasa vasorum.
The larger arteries, including the common femoral artery, superficial femoral artery, and
popliteal artery, are typically spared.
Popliteal entrapment syndrome
Popliteal entrapment syndrome is compression of the popliteal artery by a fibrous
band or calf muscles, most commonly an aberrant or hypertrophied medial head of the
gastrocnemius. Bilateral involvement is common.
There are 6 different types of popliteal entrapment, depending on the deviation of the
aberrant muscle and the popliteal artery. However, by far the most common anomalies
involve the medial head of the gastrocnemius, with either medial deviation (type I) or no
deviation (type II) of the popliteal artery.
Most commonly utilized imaging modality is MRA with dynamic imaging where the patient
is asked to perform plantar/dorsal flexion during image acquisition.
Treatment is surgical release of the offending muscle (usually the medial head of the
gastrocnemius). Angiography is only used for diagnosis, not therapy.
6
A
Popliteal entrapment syndrome: Left MRA image shows normal popliteal arteries during rest. During foot
plantar flexion (right image), there is cutoff (arrow) of the right popliteal artery at the popliteal fossa.
Vascular: 583