Microangiopathy
Microangiopathy describes age-related chronic axonal loss, gliosis, and ischemic changes
seen in up to 80% of elderly individuals. Microangiopathy never involves the corpus
callosum: If involvement of the corpus callosum is present, an alternative diagnosis should
be considered, such as MS or neoplasm.
Binswanger disease represents the combination of dementia and severe microangiopathy.
INFECTIOUS (VIRAL) WHITE MATTER DISEASE
Progressive multifocal eukoentephalopathy (PML)
Axial FLAIR images at three different levels show asymmetric multifocal FLAIR hyperintense white matter
lesions involving the right frontal lobe subcortical U-fibers (left image, arrows), left temporal lobe (middle
image), left cerebellum and brainstem (right image). The lesions demonstrate restricted diffusion and lack of
enhancement (not shown). This patient has a history of rheumatoid. arthritis and immunosuppression from
rituximab prescribed for pemphigoid. JC virus was detected in CSF sample by PCR.
Progressive multifocal eukoencephalopathy (PML) is a demyelinating disease of
mmunocompromised patients caused by reactivation of JC virus. There is progressive
demyelination with lack of inflammatory response.
PML occurs most commonly in AIDS patients (PML is an AIDS defining illness), but can also
be seen in patients with malignancy, status post-organ transplant, or with autoimmune
disorders. Approximately 1 in 1,000 patients with MS treated with natalizumab (Tysabri)
may have superimposed PML and it may be difficult to distinguish between MS and PML.
Diagnosis is made by PCR for JC virus DNA in CSF.
MR imaging of PML shows asymmetric multifocal white matter lesions that may become
confluent. There is rarely mass effect or enhancement. The arcuate (subcortical U) fibers
are typically involved. Arcuate fibers are myelinated tracts at the gray-white junction that
connect cortex to cortex.
In an AIDS patient, the primary differential for white matter lesions is PML and HIV
encephalitis. In contrast to PML, HIV encephalitis is usually bilateral (and symmetric), spares
the subcortical white matter, and is associated with cerebral atrophy:
Diffuse bilateral involvement, sparing of subcortical white matter, and cerebral atrophy - HIV encephalitis.
Asymmetric signal, involvement of subcortical white matter, hypointensity on T1-weighted images,
peripheral DWI hyperintensity, and lack of atrophy during acute phase - PML. However, progressive
cerebral atrophy can be seen in late stage PML.
Neuro Brain: 735