Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) lowers elevated portal pressures by the
creation of a direct connection between the portal vein and the hepatic vein.
The most common indication for TIPS is treatment of variceal hemorrhage that cannot be
controlled endoscopically and refractory ascites. Other indications for TIPS include Budd-
Chiari (hepatic vein thrombosis), and hepatic hydrothorax.
Assessment of hepatic dysfunction is performed pre-procedure with either the Child-Pugh
classification or Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score.
The Child-Pugh classification of hepatic dysfunction combines lab values (INR, bilirubin, and albumin) with
clinical assessment (ascites and hepatic encephalopathy.
The MELD score of hepatic dysfunction combines INR, bilirubin, and creatinine in a complex logarithmic
formula. The higher the MELD score, the higher the post-TIPS mortality.
Absolute contraindications to TIPS include:
Right-sided heart failure, which will be worsened by TIPS, as right-sided venous return increases.
Severe active hepatic failure, as the post-TIPS shunting of blood beyond the hepatic sinusoids can cause
liver function to worsen further.
Severe hepatic encephalopathy, which TIPS can worsen.
Portal vein patency should be established pre-procedure with cross-sectional or ultrasound
imaging.
Usually the right hepatic vein is connected with the right portal vein via a covered stent. The
right hepatic vein has relatively constant anatomy and tends to be larger than the left.
After the right hepatic vein is cannulated, wedged balloon CO,occlusion venography is
performed and the portal vein is retrogradely opacified. CO,i is the preferred contrast agent
as it is 400 times less viscous than iodinated contrast and is therefore easily able to pass
through the hepatic sinusoids.
The most demanding portion of the procedure is establishing access into a portal vein. Once
a tract between the hepatic and portal circulation is secured, the tract is sequentially dilated
and stented, aiming for a reduction of the portosystemic gradient to <12 mm Hg.
TIPS patency is followed by Doppler ultrasound, discussed in the gastrointestinal imaging
chapter.
IR: 634