Pyriform aperture stenosis (PAS)
Pyriform aperture stenosis: Axial non-contrast CT shows thickening and medialization of the nasal processes of
the maxilla (yellow arrows) with resultant narrowing of the frontal opening of the nose, right greater than left.
A central maxillary mega-incisor (red arrow) is also seen.
Pyriform aperture stenosis is a rare but potentially lethal cause of congenital upper airway
obstruction that may clinically mimic choanal atresia.
PAS results from early fusion and hypertrophy of the medial nasal processes, causing
narrowing of the pyriform aperture.
There is an association with other cranial-facial abnormalities, including the presence of
holoprosencephaly, central incisor tooth and pituitary dysfunction.
Key imaging features include overgrowth and medial displacement of the maxillary nasal
processes, hypoplasia of the hard palate, and piriform aperture width of less than 11 mm in
a term infant.
Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (JNA)
Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma is a highly vascular, benign hamartomatous lesion
seen in adolescent males. It typically originates at the sphenopalatine foramen and spreads
into the nasopharynx and pterygopalatine fossa, causing bony remodeling along the way.
The primary differential is nasal rhabdomyosarcoma, which causes bony destruction.
For an image of JNA, please refer to the head and neck section in the neuroimaging chapter.
Nasal rhabdomyosarcoma
Nasal rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common childhood soft tissue sarcoma, with the head
and neck a common primary site. It presents as a highly aggressive mass.
Nasal habdomyosarcoma: Axial contrast-enhanced CT (left image) and axial fat-suppressed post-contrast
T1-weighted MRI at al higher level (right image) shows a destructive, avidly enhancing mass invading the
nasopharynx and causing bony destruction of the left posterior wall of the maxillary sinus and pterygoid plates
(yellow arrows). There is invasion into the left medial temporal lobe (red arrow) apparent on MRI.
Peds: 1086