HAND ANATOMY AND PATHOLOGIES
Hypothenar hammer syndrome (HHS)
Hypothenar hammer syndrome represents
injury to the ulnar artery as it crosses the
hamate bone. Chronic repetitive trauma causes
the ulnar artery to chronically be traumatized
at the hamate, leading to intimal injury,
thrombus, aneurysm, or pseudoaneurysm.
The classic clinical history of hypothenar
hammer syndrome is a jackhammer operator
with ischemia of the fourth and fifth digits.
Ultrasound should be used as an initial imaging
modality, followed by CTA or MRA. Classic
imaging features include corkscrew or tortuous
appearance of the distal ulnar artery at the
level of the hook of the hamate. Aneurysmal
dilation and distal embolic occlusions are seen
due to distal thrombi, usually in the fourth and
fifth fingers.
Patient presented with cyanotic fingers. CTA with 3D
rendered images revealed corkscrew appearance of
Treatment is surgical, as there is often ulnar the ulnar artery (yellow arrow) with abrupt cutoff of
artery injury not apparent on angiography.
the digital artery (red arrow).
Buerger disease
Buerger disease or thromboangitis obliterans, is a chronic inflammatory, thrombotic
arteritis that affects the lower extremities (most commonly) and the hands (less commonly).
It is seen in adult male smokers and should be clinically suspected in a middle-aged male
presenting with Claudication. Primary treatment of Buerger disease is smoking cessation.
Small vessel occlusions and distal corkscrew collaterals are the typical angiographic features.
Raynaud disease
Raynaud disease is small arterial vasospasm triggered by cold temperature. Raynaud disease
is associated with scleroderma and other connective tissue disorders.
On imaging, there is decreased perfusion of the distal digital arteries, with improvement
upon warming or vasodilator administration.
Thromboembolic disease
Thromboembolic disease of the upper
extremities is most commonly caused by
cardiac emboli (of which atrial fibrillation is a
common cause). Less commonly, a subclavian
artery aneurysm may be the source of the
thrombus.
If the source of emboli is central (such as the
heart), bilateral disease would be expected,
while a unilateral lesion would show unilateral
emboli.
The characteristic imaging feature of distal
thromboembolic disease is occlusion of distal MRA: shows multifocal occlusion of the digital arteries
small arteries of the hand.
(arrows) due to emboli in a patient with subclavian
vein thrombus and acute finger discoloration.
Vascular: 578