GALLSTONES AND CHOLECYSTITIS
Cholelithiasis
Single gallstone: Sagittal ultrasound of the gallbladder shows Multiple small gallstones: Sagittal ultrasound
an echogenic gallstone (calipers) in the gallbladder neck, with of the gallbladder in a different patient shows
posterior acoustic shadowing (arrows).
multiple small shadowing gallstones (arrows).
Cholelithiasis is a gallbladder stone or stones, without associated inflammation.
The classic clinical presentation of symptomatic cholelithiasis is colicky right upper
quadrant pain after eating a fatty meal, but it is common to see gallstones incidentally in
asymptomatic patients.
Risk factors for developing gallstones include female sex, obesity, pregnancy, middle age,
and diabetes.
The ultrasound diagnosis of gallstones is usually straightforward. Stones are echogenic with
posterior acoustic shadowing and are usually mobile. It is often helpful to reposition the
patient (typically in the left lateral decubitus position) while scanning to assess whether the
stones layer dependently to differentiate stones from polyps or other masses.
A gallbladder completely full of stones can be more challenging to identify. The wall-echo-
shadow (WES) sign describes a gallbladder full of multiple stones (or one giant stone).
Wal-echo-shadow, sign on ultrasound: Two parallel
echogenic arcs represent the gallbladder wall and
leading edge of the stone (yellow arrows), with an
intervening thin layer of hypoechoic bile (red arrow).
The gallstones cast a prominent shadow, obscuring
evaluation of the remainder of the gallbladder wall,
as in this image.
The differential diagnosis of echogenic material within the gallbladder includes:
Gallstone(s) (echogenic, mobile, shadowing).
Gallbladder sludge (echogenic, mobile, non-shadowing).
Gallbladder polyp (echogenic, non-mobile, non-shadowing, often attached to the gallbladder wall via a
stalk, may be vascular).
Hyperplastic cholecystoses (echogenic, non-mobile, multiple polyps).
Porcelain gallbladder (echogenic wall, shadowing).
Adjacent bowel (echogenic wall, dirty shadowing).
GI: 131