Multiple sclerosis (MS; continued)
Dissemination in space can be demonstrated by detection of T2 hyperintense lesions at least
3 mm in size in at least two of the classically affected areas: the periventricular white matter,
spinal cord, infratentorial brain, juxtacortical white matter or cerebral cortex. Cortical lesions
were an addition of the most recent revision.
Dissemination in time based on MRI can be demonstrated by the presence of simultaneous
presence of both adolinlum-enhancing and non-enhancing lesions on a single study or
by the presence of new lesions demonstrating hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging or
gadolinium enhancement on subsequent studies.
istopathologicaly, destruction of myelin is caused by ymphocytes attacking
oligodendrocytes (which make CNS myelin).
As described in the McDonald criteria, focal areas of involvement manifest as lesions that
are hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging. The presence of enhancement is suggestive of
active demyelination, while the lack of enhancement suggests a chronic lesion. This allows
for demonstration of dissemination in time on a single scan, as described above.
There are certain areas of the brain where lesion involvement is more suggestive of MS over
alternative diagnoses. This includes the periventricular region, corpus callosum, subcortical
white matter, temporal lobe white matter, the brainstem, cerebellum, and the cervical
portion of the spinal cord.
Periventricular lesions have classically been described as Dawson fingers due to their ovoid configuration
perpendicular to the ventricles, resulting from inflammation: surrounding the penetrating venules.
Dawson fingers in multiple
sclerosis: Parasagittal FLAIR
shows numerous foci of T2
prolongation (arrows) within
the corpus callosum that
point towards the ventricle
in a patient with relapsing-
remitting MS.
The central vein sign describes the presence of a central vein within the white matter lesion,
identified as a central hypointensity surrounded by hyperintensity on FLAIR images, is
relatively specific for MS-related white matter lesions.
There are many recent advances to imaging of MS beyond the use of gadolinium-
enhancement as a surrogate for active inflammation. Leptomeningeal enhancement is
emerging as an imaging biomarker for active inflammation. This utilizes the emerging idea of
immune cell infiltrates, indicative of active demyelination, are present in the leptomeninges.
Although spinal involvement is not required for diagnosis, MS involves the spinal cord in
a substantial minority of patients, with the cervical spine cord most frequently involved.
Isolated spinal cord involvement is seen in up to 20% of cases of MS. Spinal MS involvement
is usually short-segment and unilateral.
Neuro Brain: 732