MUSCULOSKELETAL
RADIOTRACERS
Tc-99m MDP or HDP
Tc-99m MDP and HDP are technetium-
labeled diphosphonates which deposit
via chemisorption in the mineral phase of
bone. 20 mCi is typically administered, with
imaging performed 2-4 hours later.
Rapid renal excretion is normal; bladder
is the critical organ. Patients should void
before imaging to prevent the bladder from
obscuring a pelvic lesion.
A three-phase study incudes:
1) Radionuclide angiogram (flow) evaluates
blood flow, with images taken every few
seconds. Increased flow suggests hyperemia.
2) Blood pool evaluates the extracellular
distribution immediately following the blood
flow phase.
Normal Tc-99m MDP bone scan in anterior and
3) Standard delayed (skeletal) images are
posterior projections, with 20 mCi administered.
performed approximately 3 hours after injection. Note the normal renal and bladder uptake.
COMMON PATTERNS AND CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
Patterns with low probability of metastatic disease (in a patient with a known malignancy)
A single focus of uptake in a rib is thought to represent malignancy only -10% of the time.
Uptake in similar locations in two or more adjacent ribs is almost always due to trauma.
Multiple adjacent photopenic bony lesions are unlikely to be metastases, but may represent
infarction, avascular necrosis, or sequela of radiation therapy.
Patterns with high probability of metastatic disease
A: single sternal lesion in a patient with breast cancer is due to metastasis -80% of the time.
Multifocal areas of increased activity in nonadjacent ribs are suspicious for metastases.
A: single photopenic lesion in patients with a known malignancy (especially neuroblastoma,
renal cell carcinoma, and thyroid cancer) is due to metastasis 80% of the time.
Beware of the flare phenomenon within three months of starting chemotherapy, where
treated bone metastases demonstrate increased uptake due to healing. Tracer uptake
should regress by 6 months following treatment.
Cancers likely to produce a false-negative bone scan
While bone scan is highly sensitive for osseous metastases that induce bone turnover or are
predominantly osteoblastic, such as prostate cancer, it has low sensitivity for predominantly
osteoclastic or lytic metastases. These tumors include multiple myeloma, renal cell
carcinoma, thyroid carcinoma, aggressive anaplastic tumors, and neuroblastoma.
Marrow-replacing tumors such as lymphoma can also produce negative bone scans.
Aggressive and lytic bony lesions or those confined to the marrow are better seen on F-18
FDG PET/CT.
Nucs: 471