Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome
SMA: syndrome is compression of the duodenum between the aorta and the SMA, and is
also known as Wilkie syndrome.
SMA syndrome occurs in thin children, burn victims, and patients who have lost weight.
CTA or MRA can diagnose duodenal compression by SMA. Aortomesenteric angle or
distance can be measured to assess the degree of stenosis.
Normal aortomesenteric angle = 28-65 degrees; aortomesenteric distance = 10-34 mm
In SMA syndrome aortomesenteric angle - 6-22 degrees; aortomesenteric distance = 2-8 mm.
In addition to the narrowing of the SMA angle, dilation of the first and second part of the duodenum as
well as stomach are the key elements of the diagnosis.
Treatment starts with medical management, and if conservative treatment fails then surgical
approach including lysis of the ligament of Treitz or duodenojejunostomy can be done.
RENAL VESSELS
Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis
Atherosclerosis is the most common cause of renal artery stenosis in older adults.
Atherosclerosis tends to affect the ostia (origin) of the renal arteries.
Both CTA and MRA have high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of renal artery
stenosis. However, high sensitivity diagnosis by MRA is applicable only to the proximal
segments.
Angioplasty and stenting have greater long-term patency compared to angioplasty alone.
Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD)
Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD)
is an idiopathic, non-infectious,
non-inflammatory vascular disease
affecting primarily the renal and
carotid arteries. FMD is bilateral
2/3 of the time.
FMD is predominantly seen in young
or middle-aged women.
In contrast to the ostial involvement
of renal artery atherosclerosis, FMD
tends to affect the mid or distal third
of the renal arteries.
The most common form of FMD is
the medial fibroplasia subtype (80%),
which features the classic string of
pearls or string of beads appearance
on angiography.
Al less common form is intimal
Fibromuscular dysplasia (medial fibroplasia subtype): MIP
fibroplasia, which is more common image from an MRA of the abdominal aorta shows the
in children and appears as a smooth classic "beaded" appearance of both renal arteries (arrows)
stenosis, not the string of pearls
predominantly in the mid portion of the renal arteries, with
typical of medial fibroplasia.
sparing of the ostia.
Perimedial and adventitial fibroplasia are less common variants.
Diagnosis workup includes CTA or MRA. Angiography is reserved for treatment.
Vascular: 568