OTHER MALIGNANT DISEASE OF THE BREAST
Angiosarcoma
Axial post-contrast subtraction.
Axial T2-weighted image with fat suppression.
Radiation-associated angiosarcoma: There are
T2 hyperintense superficial nodular areas of
enhancement in the right breast that are contiguous
with the skin (arrows).
MIP image shows the extent of the abnormality
involving both the skin and the deeper tissues of the
right breast.
The patient was previously treated for breast cancer
on the right and has bilateral implants.
Case courtesy Lorraine B. Smith, MD, Brigham and
Maximum intensity projection (MIP).
Women's Hospital.
Angiosarcoma of the breast is a rare and aggressive malignancy that may be primary in
origin, or secondary to prior breast conservation therapy with radiation.
Primary angiosarcoma arises in the breast parenchyma and can present as a palpable mass or diffuse
breast enlargement without a mass.
Radiation-associated angiosarcoma arises in the breast dermis and subcutis, presenting as areas of skin
thickening and ecchymosis that can mimic bruising, thereby delaying diagnosis.
Mammographic and ultrasound findings of radiation-associated angiosarcoma are
nonspecific. On MRI, angiosarcoma is hyperintense on T2-weighted images and
demonstrates intense enhancement.
Lymphoma
The most common primary breast lymphoma is diffuse large B-cell ymphoma. Clinically,
most breast lymphomas present as a palpable mass. Axillary adenopathy may be present.
On mammography, lymphoma may present as a mass with indistinct margins. On
ultrasound, lymphoma typically appears as a hypoechoic mass. In contrast to epithelial
cancers such as invasive ductal carcinoma, calcifications are rarely seen in breast lymphoma.
In a patient with a known diagnosis of lymphoma and a new breast mass, the primary
consideration remains breast cancer. Histologic sampling is essential as lymphoma is treated
with chemoradiation, not surgery.
Breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a rare primary T-cell lymphoma
of the breast. It is most often seen with textured breast implants and classically presents as
an effusion around the implant or residual fibrous capsule. Therefore, any new peri-implant
effusion occurring more than 12 months following implant placement should prompt
consideration for this rare entity.
Breast: 427