CARDIAC MASSES
Rhabdomyoma
Rhabdomyoma is the most common primary cardiac tumor in infants and children. It is
strongly associated with tuberous sclerosis and is the earliest sign of tuberous sclerosis that
can be diagnosed in utero. Rhabdomyomas are often multiple.
Rhabdomyoma has a varied clinical presentation, including arrhythmia and outflow
obstruction depending on location of the tumor. It is usually found in the ventricles.
The most common radiographic appearance of rhabdomyoma is cardiomegaly. Pulmonary
vasculature is variable.
On MRI, rhabdomyomas are T1 isointense to hyperintense, T2 hyperintense, and
hypoenhancing relative to myocardium.
Typical clinical course is spontaneous regression in childhood. Therefore, rhabdomyomas in
asymptomatic patients are treated conservatively.
Fibroma
Cardiac fibroma: Coronal (left image) and axial (right image) CT angiogram demonstrates a large well-
circumscribed mass arising from the anterior lateral left ventricular myocardium, which is hypoenhancing
relative to adjacent normal myocardium and with central coarse calcification.
Fibroma is a rare benign cardiac tumor of infancy and early childhood, arising from
fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.
Fibroma has a similar clinical presentation to rhabdomyoma, with rhythm disturbances and
outflow obstruction. The interventricular septum is the most common site of origin, where
a fibroma is especially likely to cause arrhythmia due to disruption of the conduction system.
Cardiomegaly is the most common radiographic finding.
Central calcification on CT is a pathognomonic finding of fibromas, which differentiates them
from rhabdomyomas.
MRI classically shows a well-defined mass that is T1 hypointense to isointense relative
to myocardium, T2 hypointense, and demonstrates progressive enhancement with a
hypoenhancing core due to poor blood supply.
Unlike rhabdomyoma, fibroma often present as a single mass and do not involute.
Therefore, treatment is typically surgical resection.
Peds: 1122