Organizing pneumonia (OP)
Axial CT shows patchy consolidative
and ground glass opacities in a
peribronchovascular distribution. There
is a reverse halo or atoll sign in the right
lower lobe (arrow), where a central
lucency is surrounded by a peripheral
opacity.
Case courtesy Seth Kligerman, MD,
University of Maryland.
Organizing pneumonia is the histological pattern of alveolar inflammation with granulation
tissue polyps that fill the distal airways and alveoli. OP may be a response to infection, drug
reaction, or inhalation. OP may be idiopathic or related to connective tissue disease as well.
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP) is idiopathic OP, previously called bronchiolitis
obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP).
COP clinically responds to steroids with a good prognosis and may resolve completely,
although recurrences are common.
CT shows consolidation or ground glass opacities in a peripheral and peribronchovascular
distribution. The reverse halo sign (also known as the atoll sign) features a central lucency
surrounded by a ground glass halo. Reverse halo sign is not specific but in the appropriate
context is highly suggestive of OP.
The reverse halo. sign should not be confused with the halo sign that is typical of invasive aspergillus,
which shows a central opacity with peripheral ground glass.
Respiratory bronchiolitis - interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD)
Axial CT shows innumerable
subcentimeter centrilobular
nodules of ground glass attenuation
(arrows). None of the nodules
extend to the pleural surface,
which is typical of a centrilobular
distribution. This was a case of
respiratory bronchiolitis interstitial
lung disease (RB-ILD).
Respiratory bronchiolitis - interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD) is both the clinical syndrome and
the pathologic diagnosis of this smoking-related interstitial lung disease.
Respiratory bronchiolitis (RB, without the ILD) is common in smokers, where pigmented
macrophages are found in respiratory bronchioles. RB is usually asymptomatic, but if
symptomatic (usually cough and shortness of breath), the clinical syndrome is called RB-ILD.
Histologically, RB-ILD is characterized by sheets of macrophages filling the terminal airways,
with relative sparing of the alveoli.
The key imaging features of RB-ILD are centrilobular nodules in the lung apices.
Chest: 57