Thallium rest-redistribution (rest) SPECT
For evaluation of myocardial viability prior to revascularization therapy, a rest-rest or rest-
redistribution thallium study can be helpful. Following thallium injection at rest, images are
obtained at 15 minutes and 3-4 hours later. Uptake on the delayed (redistribution) images
indicates viable myocardium.
PET perfusion
PET rest-stress myocardial perfusion has greater sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for
diagnosis of coronary artery disease compared to SPECT imaging.
Rubidium-82 and N-13 ammonia are perfusion agents and are imaged on a PET system using
coincidence detection. The shorter half-life of these tracers allows higher activities to be
administered with lower overall radiation exposure. For quantification of myocardial blood
flow, both rubidium-82 and N-13 ammonia have been validated.
PET myocardial viability (glucose metabolism)
F-18 FDG PET is preferred over thallium for evaluation of myocardial viability.
To induce metabolism of glucose over fatty acids by the myocardium, patient is loaded with
oral or IV glucose after a 6-hour fast, which triggers endogenous insulin production that in
turn encourages glucose uptake and decreases fatty acid levels.
FDG uptake is seen in both normal myocardium and ischemic but viable myocardium.
SPECT/CT and PET/CT
Attenuaton-correction CT improves diagnostic accuracy by eliminating attenuation artifact
and can be used for coronary artery calcium scoring.
IMAGE INTERPRETATION
Key to successful perfusion imaging interpretation is a systematic approach:
Quality control: Is it a good study?
Fori instance, in a single-day rest-stress study, the stress images should have higher signal to noise
compared to the rest images since 3x more radiotracer was administered. If not, consider dose infiltration.
Is there misregistration between the stress and rest images, or between the SPECT and
CT images? The attenuation-corrected and uncorrected images should be compared for
potential artifacts.
The coronal/rotating raw SPECT images can show important ancillary findings:
Is there motion artifact?
Gated stress supine
Sinogram
Stress Tc-99m sestamibi rotating
projection (representative image
shown on left) and sinogram with
patient in the supine position
(top row) demonstrate motion, as
Gated stress prone
Sinogram
indicated by horizontal breaks in the
sinogram (arrows).
Prone position stress sinogram
(bottom row) shows no motion
artifact.
Cardiac: 491