Visceral compartment
The boundaries include (a) superiorly, the thoracic inlet; (b) inferiorly, the diaphragm; (c)
anteriorly, the posterior boundaries of the prevascular compartment; and (d) posteriorly, a
vertical line connecting the thoracic vertebral bodies 1 cm posterior to its anterior margin.
Essentially, it contains the heart, great vessels, trachea, and esophagus. Most lymph nodes
are located in the middle mediastinum.
The phrenic, vagus, and recurrent laryngeal nerves pass through the AP window within the
visceral compartment.
Paravertebral compartment
The anterior boundary of the paravertebral compartment is 1 cm posterior to the anterior
vertebral body and the posterior boundary is a vertical line along the posterior margin of the
chest wall at the lateral aspect of the transverse processes.
Lines, stripes, and interfaces
Interfaces between anatomic structures in the lungs, mediastinum, and pleura may be
displaced or thickened in the presence of a mediastinal mass or abnormality.
A "line" is a thin interface formed by tissue (typically <1 mm in thickness) with air on both sides.
A "stripe" is a thicker interface formed between air and adjacent soft tissue.
An "interface" is formed by the contact of two soft tissue structures of different densities.
posterior junction
line
right paratracheal
left paratracheal
stripe
stripe
anterior junction
line
AP window
azygoesophageal
recess
right paraspinal
left paraspinal
line
line
The anterior junction line is formed by 4 layers of pleura (parietal and visceral pleura of
each lung) at the anterior junction of the right and left lungs.
On a frontal radiograph, the anterior junction line is a vertical line projecting over the superior two-thirds
of the sternum.
Abnormal convexity or displacement of this line suggests a prevascular mediastinal mass.
The posterior junction line is also formed by 4 layers of pleura (parietal and visceral pleura
of each lung), but at the posterior junction of the right and left lungs.
On a frontal radiograph, the posterior junction line is a vertical line projecting through the trachea on the
frontal view, more superior than the anterior junction line. Unlike the anterior junction line, the posterior
junction line is seen above the clavicles because the posterior lungs extend more superiorly than the
anterior lungs. It is much less commonly seen than the anterior junction line.
Abnormal convexity or displacement of this line suggests a paravertebral mediastinal mass or aortic
aneurysm.
Chest: 71