Surfactant deficiency disease (SDD) / Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) / Hyaline membrane disease (continued)
SDD is the most common cause of respiratory distress and death in pre-term infants.
It is caused by insufficient surfactant (due to immature type II pneumocytes) and resultant
decreased lung compliance.
Greater than 95% of cases are seen in pre-term infants born before 34 weeks. Less
commonly, term babies born to diabetic mothers or via Caesarean delivery have increased
prevalence of SDD.
Imaging is characterized by low lung volumes (prior to intubation) with diffuse hazy granular
opacities, air-bronchograms and no pleural effusions.
Surfactant replacement therapy may result in rapid decrease in granular opacification and improved lung
volume.
Differential diagnosis for granular opacities in a newborn is neonatal pneumonia (i.e., Group B strep.),
which typically also features pleural effusions.
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE) is a condition often associated with SDD, where
barotrauma causes air to dissect through the immature alveoli into the interstitial space and
spread along the lymphatic pathways. It usually occurs in the first week of life.
The radiographic appearance of PIE is hyperinflated lungs with asymmetric bubbly and tubular lucencies
representing dissecting air bubbles. PIE may lead to pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax. Rarely, it may
also cause large intrapulmonary pneumatoceles.
Treatment of PIE includes switching ventilation modes, high-frequency oscillating ventilation (unique to
pediatrics) and placing the patient on affected side down.
Chronic lung disease (CLD) of prematurity / bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD): SDD
(with or without PIE) lasts for a few days to a week. Beyond that, persistent lung disease is
concerning for early or evolving CLD which usually presents in the second to third week.
CLD is the most common cause of chronic respiratory failure in pediatric patients.
CLD is clinically defined as chronic lung disease of premature infants with oxygen dependency longer than
28 days of life and failed Oxygen challenge at 36 weeks post-conception.
Unlike SDD, CLD features mild hyperinflation and band-like coarse reticular opacities.
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema: Chest radiograph Chronic lung disease of prematurity: Chest
shows hyperinflated lungs with many small cystic
radiograph in a 28-day-old infant with a history of
lucencies representing dissecting air bubbles.
prior respiratory distress syndrome shows coarse
interstitial opacities and normal to slightly increased
lung volumes. An endotracheal tube and two
nasogastric tubes are partially visualized.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of
Virginia Health System.
Peds: 1095