STRIDOR = OTHER CAUSES
Subglottic hemangioma
Subglottic hemangioma is a benign vascular neoplasm that
PHACES syndrome:
produces stridor in infancy. It is the most common pediatric
Posterior fossa malformation.
subglottic tracheal mass.
Hemangiomas.
The classic radiographic finding is asymmetric narrowing
Arterial anomalies.
of the subglottic trachea on the frontal view (versus
symmetric narrowing in croup).
Coarctation/cardiac defects.
There is an association with cutaneous hemangiomas and
Eye abnormalities.
PHACES syndrome.
Subglottic hemangiomas, sternal
clefts, supraumbilical raphes.
Laryngeal papillomatosis
Laryngeal papillomatosis is a cause of multiple laryngeal nodules due to HPV infection,
resulting in thick and nodular vocal cords. Papillomatosis increases the risk of laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), analogous to cervical cancer risk from HPV.
Papillomas frequently seed the lungs, causing multiple cavitary nodules. These nodules are
also at risk for the development of SCC.
Tracheohronchomolacia
Tracheomalacia: Inspiratory CT (left image) demonstrates the normal, slightly ovoid shape of the trachea.
Expiratory CT (right image) in the same patient shows excessive tracheal collapse (arrow). This example is from
an adult with mild emphysema.
Case courtesy Michael Hanley, MD, University of Virginia Health System.
racheobronchomalada causes excessive expiratory airway collapse from weakness of the
tracheobronchial cartilage. Tracheobronchomalaca may be either congenital or acquired
secondary to intubation, infection, or chronic inflammation.
A: standard inspiratory CT may be normal. Dynamic four-dimensional CT or bronchoscopy are
necessary to diagnose tracheobronchomalaca.
Greater than 50% reduction in cross-sectional area of the airway lumen is suggestive
of tracheomalacia, although normal patients may achieve this threshold with a forceful
expiration.
A very common association is with esophageal tresa/tacheoesopnagea fistula (TEF).
Tracheal stenosis
latrogenic tracheal stenosis (e.g., due to prolonged intubation) may be a cause of stridor.
Congenital tracheal stenosis is usually associated with vascular anomalies, discussed in the
following section.
Peds: 1089