PRIMARY DURAL NEOPLASMS
Meningioma
Meningioma is by far the most common extra-axial tumor, the most common benign
primary intracranial tumor in adults, and the most common cause of a solitary dural mass. It
arises from meningothelial arachnoid "cap" cells. The vast majority are benign (WHO grade
1), but 4% are atypical (grade 2) and 1-2% are anaplastic or malignant (grade 3).
Meningiomas typically occur in elderly adults with a female predominance and are most
often asymptomatic.
The main environmenta/acquired risk factor is ionizing radiation exposure. Meningioma is the most
common radiation-induced intracranial neoplasm.
The main genetic predisposition is neurofibromatosis type 2. These patients often have multiple
meningiomas.
Meningiomas can occur anywhere in the neuraxis, but are most commonly supratentorial,
which may be at the convexities, parasagita/falcine, or along the skull base (e.g., olfactory
groove, planum sphenoidale, tuberculum sellae, or sphenoid ridge). Other special locations
intraventricular, optic nerve sheath, cerebellopontine angle, jugular foramen, parasellar,
and spinal) are discussed elsewhere in this book.
Meningiomas have a broad dural base; the morphology is most often globose (round) but
occasionally en plaque (sheet-like).
On noncontrast CT, meningiomas are usually hyperattenuating relative to brain and
approximately 25% calcify.
On MRI, appearance can be variable with iso- or slightly hypointense signal on T1-weighted
images and variable signal intensity on T2-weighted images.
Meningiomas avidly enhance. An enhancing dural tail is thought to be due to vasoactive
substances released by the meningioma rather than tumor spread to the dura. On
conventional angiography, meningiomas show early arterial enhancement and contrast
retention in venous phase, termed the mother-in-law sign (comes early, stays late).
Despite the extra-axial location of most meningiomas, there may be extensive white matter
edema, thought to be due to vasoactive factors and a pial vascular supply. There is often
a discordance between the size of meningioma and degree of white matter edema, with
severe edema possible even with a very small tumor.
The adjacent bone may show reactive hyperostotic changes or even intraosseous
transosseous extension, mimicking fibrous dysplasia or an osteoblastic malignancy. Rarely,
primary intraosseous meningioma arises within the calvarium with little if any dural
involvement.
Solitary fibrous ume/hemangoperityomo
A rare mimic of meningioma is the spectrum of solitary fibrous tumor (WHO grade 1) and
hemangiopericytoma (grade 2 or 3). Elsewhere in the body, hemangioperitytoma has
been redesignated as solitary fibrous tumor but the separate term remains popular in
neuropathology.
On MRI, solitary fibrous tumor often shows the yin-yang sign "black-and-white mixed"
appearance) of patches of low and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. The low
signal areas reflect fibrous stroma. There is strong contrast enhancement, reflecting tumor
vascularity; flow-voids and vasogenic edema are common.
Neuro Brain: 727