CYSTIC LUNG DISEASE
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH)
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis: Chest
radiograph shows multiple upper-lobe predominant
cysts with the suggestion of multiple small nodules.
There is a moderate left pneumothorax (yellow arrow).
CT confirms the pneumothorax (yellow arrow) but
more clearly delineates the upper-lobe predominant
cysts (better seen in the top right image) and nodules
(bottom left image, red arrows).
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH) is a smoking-related lung disease - nearly
100% of adults with PLCH are smokers.
The other smoking-related interstitial lung diseases (aside from emphysema) are RB-ILD and DIP.
Multiple smoking-related lung diseases may be present simultaneously.
PLCH may present as a spontaneous pneumothorax.
Disease in adults is most often isolated to the lungs; however, lucent bone lesions, diabetes
insipidus from inflammation of the pituitary stalk hypophysitis), and skin involvement can
occasionally be seen.
In addition to LCH, the differential diagnosis for diseases affecting the lungs and bones includes malignancy,
tuberculosis, fungal disease (including Blastomycosis, Histoplasmosis, and Coccidiodomycosis), sarcoidosis,
and Gaucher disease (pulmonary involvement is rare and may resemble DIP).
The first detectable abnormality is nodules associated with airways. As the disease
progresses, the nodules cavitate and resultant irregular cysts predominate.
The natural progression is from nodules 1 cavitary nodules 1 irregular cysts.
At any point in time, a patient may have nodules only; nodules + cysts; or cysts only.
Radiographic and CT findings include upper-lobe predominant cysts and irregular
peribronchovascular nodules, both sparing the costophrenic sulci.
The cheerio. sign in LCH refers to pulmonary nodules with a central lucent cavity supplied by a patent
bronchus on CT imaging.
Smoking cessation is critical for stopping the progression of PLCH. However, the cysts will
not resolve.
Chest: 67