WHITE MATTER DISEASE
WHITE MATTER OVERVIEW
White matter imaging overview
The typical MRI appearance of white matter injury is T2 prolongation of the affected white
matter. Less commonly, tumefactive demyelination may be mass-like, enhance, and look
very similar to a tumor.
The key imaging finding of demyelinating disease is minimal mass effect relative to the
lesion size.
A frequent pattern of white matter disease consisting of scattered foci of T2 prolongation in
the subcortical, deep, and periventricular white matter is seen very commonly, especially
in older adults. In older patients, this pattern is most likely due to chronic microvascular
ischemia. In younger patients, a similar pattern can be seen in chronic migraine headaches,
as sequela of prior infectious or inflammatory disease, and with demyelination.
Normal structures may mimic white matter disease on T2 images
Virchow-Robin spaces are tiny perivascular spaces that follow deep penetrating vessels
into the subarachnoid space. They are common in the basal ganglia and the midbrain. On
CT, Virchow-Robin spaces can mimic chronic lacunar infarcts, but are usually present in
the lower third of the basal ganglia. On MRI, Virchow-Robin spaces follow CSF signal on all
sequences, including FLAIR.
Enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces and a J-shaped sella can be seen in the mucopolysaccnandoses,
Ependymitis granularis represents frontal horn periventricular hyperintensity on T2-
weighted images due to interstitial CSF backup. Despite the name ("-itis"), ependymitis
granularis is not associated with inflammation.
IDIOPATHIC/AUTOIMMUNE/INFLAMMATORY WHITE MATTER DISEASE
Multiple sclerosis (MS)
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is idiopathic inflammatory destruction of CNS axons in the brain
and spinal cord. MS is likely autoimmune in etiology and may be associated with other
autoimmune diseases such as Graves disease and myasthenia gravis.
MS is the most common chronic demyelinating disease. It often leads to severe disability.
MS is more common in middle-aged Caucasian females from northern latitudes.
There are two main clinical presentations of MS:
1) Relapsing-remitting (most common): Partial or complete resolution of each acute attack.
2) Progressive: No resolution or incomplete resolution between acute attacks.
Primary progressive: Slow onset without discrete exacerbations.
Secondary progressive: Similar to relapsing-remitting but with less complete resolution between
attacks, leading to progressive disability.
The diagnostic criteria for MS has been based on two concepts: the detection of focal
neurological disease disseminated in space and time, based on clinical symptoms and brain
MRI findings. The specific findings that constitute a diagnosis have been described
as the McDonald criteria, which was most recently revised in 2017. The MacDonald
criteria also describe intermediate diagnoses that do not meet all clinical or radiologic
criteria simultaneously as clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) and radiologically isolated
syndrome (RIS).
Neuro Brain: 731