Combining WBC and sulfur colloid scintigraphy adds specificity in the evaluation of
osteomyelitis because bone marrow is replaced by infection and white cells. Actively
infected bone marrow will show discordantly increased uptake on the WBC scan and
reduced activity on sulfur colloid.
Note that WBC scan imaging is not sensitive for spinal osteomyelitis, thought to be due to the inability of
leukocytes to migrate into an encapsulated infection.
WBC scan can be performed with either Indium-111-WBC or TC-99m-HMPAO-WBC. Indium WBC: scan has
higher radiation dose, takes 24 hours to perform, and the image has more noise. The disadvantage of Tc-
99m-HMPAO is its tendency to dissociate, leading to genitourinary excretion of radiotracer.
MRI is highly sensitive to detect early osteomyelitis within 3-5 days. MRI has similar
sensitivity to radionuclide studies, but greater specificity. MRI can better delineate the
extent of infection, any fluid collections that must be treated surgically, sinus tracts, and skin
ulcers.
The hallmark of MRI imaging of osteomyelitis is replacement of the normal fatty marrow
signal. Edema and exudates cause high marrow signal on T2-weighted images and low
signal on T1-weighted images. MRI has very high negative predictive value: A negative MRI
essentially excludes osteomyelitis.
Abnormal signal intensity in the bone on fluid-sensitive sequences does not necessarily signify that
osteomyelitis is present. To confidently diagnose osteomyelitis on MR, the T1-weighted images should
be carefully scrutinized. Three patterns of signal alteration on T1-weighted images have been described,
which are confluent intramedullary, hazy reticular, and subcortical. Of these, only the confluent
intramedullary pattern is highly associated with osteomyelitis.
Confluent intramedullary
Hazy reticular
Subcortical
Geographica area involving medullary canal Interspersed: areas ofr normal marrow
Thin linear signal change
subiacentt to cortex
Strongly associatedy with osteomyelitis,
Cannotr reliably diagnose osteomyelitis
Cannot reliably diagnose osteomyelitis
especially with adjacentu ulcer
Rarely associatedv with
hematogenous osteomyelitis.
Confluent intramedullary:
Hazy reticular: Not osteomyelitis Subcortical: Not osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis
Three sagittal T1-weighted MRI images demonstrating confluent intramedullary (red arrows), hazy
reticular (blue arrow), and subcortical (double blue arrow) signal changes. Of these, only confluent
intramedullary signal change is strongly associated with osteomyelitis.
Gadolinium is helpful to delineate any fluid collections and to evaluate for the presence of nonenhancing
necrotic bone (sequestrum), although gadolinium is not necessary to confidently diagnose osteomyelitis.
MSK: 979