Helicobacter, pylori gastritis
Helicobacter pylori is a major cause of gastritis, gastric ulcers, and duodenal ulcers.
Zollinger-Ellison (ZE) syndrome
Zollinger-Ellison (ZE) is gastrin over-production from a gastrinoma, which is a
neuroendocrine tumor located in the duodenum or pancreas that has a 50% rate of
malignancy. ZE features elevated gastrin level and a paradoxical increase in gastrin after
secretin administration.
25% of patients with gastrinoma have multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1.
MEN-1 consists of parathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, and pancreatic islet cell tumors.
Eosinophilic gastritis
Eosinophilic gastritis is characterized by thickened folds in the stomach and small bowel in a
patient with a history of atopy.
Ménétrier disease (hypertrophic gastropathy)
Ménétrier disease is a protein-losing enteropathy that is often a diagnosis of exclusion. It
usually affects the proximal stomach and is pathologically characterized by replacement of
parietal cells by hyperplastic epithelial cells, leading to achlorhydria.
Ménétrier disease has a controversial association with gastric carcinoma.
Crohn's disease
The stomach is rarely an isolated site of involvement by Crohn's disease. Usually the distal
half of the stomach is affected.
Typical imaging features include thickened folds and mural ulcers most commonly affecting
the antrum with eventual tubular stenosis of the antrum leading to the characteristic ram's
horn appearance.
Differential diagnosis of the ram's horn appearance is sarcoid, Crohn's disease, and treated ulcer disease.
Other causes of thickened gastric folds
Gastric varices (from portal hypertension), sarcoidosis, gastric lymphoma, and submucosal
carcinoma are non-intflammatory causes of thickened gastric folds.
GASTRIC POLYPS
Hyperplastic polyp (inflammatory polyp)
A hyperplastic polyp, also known as an inflammatory polyp, is a cystic dilation of a gastric
gland that develops in response to chronic inflammation, often associated with H. pylori
infection. Hyperplastic polyps are almost always benign, with very rare cases of malignant
transformation having been reported.
Fundic gland polyps
Double-contrast barium study
demonstrates a few small, round,
wel-circumscribed radiolucent
filling defects (arrows) within the
greater curvature of the stomach,
consistent with gastric polyps seen
on patient's prior endoscopy.
GI: 188