URETER
OVERVIEW OF URETERAL IMAGING
CT urography (CTU) indications and protocol
The goal of CT urography (CTU) is to evaluate the kidneys, ureters and bladder. The key to
successful imaging is to opacify and optimally distend the ureters and bladder.
One of the most common indications for CTU is the evaluation of hematuria. Hematuria may
be caused by a urinary tract calculus, renal mass (e.g., renal cell carcinoma), and urothelial
tumor (e.g., transitional cell carcinoma).
Protocols vary by institution. Typically, patients are given 900 mL of water PO and either 250
mL of IV saline or 10 mg of IV furosemide to optimally distend the ureters and bladder.
In adults >35 years of age, CTU is performed as a three-phase exam:
Unenhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis.
Nephrographic phase through the kidneys (100 seconds after IV contrast administration).
Excretory phase of the abdomen and pelvis (15 minutes after IV contrast).
A: split-bolus (dual-phase) technique decreases radiation exposure in patients under age 35:
Unenhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis.
Combined nephrographi/excretony phase (8 minutes delay after first IV contrast bolus and 100: seconds
after the second bolus).
MALIGNANT URETERAL DISEASE
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
Multifocal transitional cell carcinoma: Coronal CT (left image) from the excretory phase of a CT urogram shows
a sessile mass within the left lateral aspect of the bladder (red arrows) and a filling defect within the proximal
left ureter (yellow arrow). Curved multiplanar reformation from the same study (right image) better shows the
proximal ureteral filling defect (arrow).
Case courtesy Chery! Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Although upper tract malignancy is relatively rare, transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the
most common ureteral neoplasm.
The typical CTU appearance is of a single short segment of wall thickening, stricture, or
filling defect at the excretory phase. However, multiple filling defects may be seen in 40%.
Given the propensity of TCC for multifocal disease, the bladder should be evaluated for a
synchronous mass.
GU: 269