Benign: Enchondroma
Enchondroma is a benign lesion of mature hyaline cartilage rests.
Int the long bones, enchondroma
features characteristic chondroid
(popcorn or ring and arc)
Radiograph of the
calcifications.
distal femur shows an
The differential diagnosis of
enchondroma with
characteristic ring and
enchondroma includes medullary
arc chondroid-type
bone infarct (which produces
calcification (arrow).
serpentine sclerosis) and
chondrosarcoma.
MRI is usually able to differentiate
between infarct and enchondroma.
Enchondroma has a characteristic
lobulated hyperintense signal on T2-
weighted images.
When occurring in the hand, enchondroma typically does not produce visible matrix and
appears as a geographic lytic lesion.
Enchondroma may be complicated by pathologic fracture, especially in the hand.
Enchondroma of the middle finger proximal phalanx (left image) complicated by pathologic fracture seen
in a subsequent radiograph (right image). The enchondroma (arrow) has no perceptible chondroid matrix,
which is a typical appearance of an enchondroma in the hand. Note the interval partial fusion of the
physes which occurred in the time interval between the two radiographs.
Enchondroma may undergo malignant transformation. Aside from Ollier and Maffucci
syndrome (subsequently discussed), malignant transformation to chondrosarcoma is very
rare, with a potential worrisome clinical finding being new pain in the absence of fracture.
There are no universally accepted guidelines for follow-up of enchondromas.
Enchondromas measuring <4 cm about the knee or shoulder are very common and likely do not need
to be followed if there is no endosteal scalloping. Enchondromas of the pelvic bones or hip may be at
increased risk for malignant transformation and many practitioners feel they should be followed.
Oni follow-up imaging, increase in degree of endosteal scalloping, cortical thinning, or increase in
size are worrisome findings. A progressive decrease in mineralizations is also worrisome for potential
malignant transformation. In contrast, progressive increase in rings-and-arcs type mineralizations suggests
maturation of the enchondroma, and is not associated with increased malignancy.
MSK: 945