Axial resolution
Axial resolution quantifies the ability to separate objects lying along axis of the
beam and is determined by spatial pulse length. Short pulses are achieved by
damping of the transducer. The spatial pulse length (SPL) is approximately 2h.
spatial pulse length
axial resolution =
2
For example, at 2 MHz, the SPL is "2 mm and the axial resolution is -1 mm.
at 4 MHz, the SPL is -1 mm and the axial resolution -0.5 mm
at 8 Mhz, the axial resolution is -0.25 mm
Axial resolution does not vary with depth.
Lateral resolution
The lateral resolution is the ability to resolve two adjacent objects.
Lateral resolution improves with beam focusing and T number lines per frame.
Lateral resolution is approximately 4x worse than axial resolution.
Lateral resolution becomes worse with increasing depth.
Elevational resolution
Elevational resolution is the resolution in the plane perpendicular to the plane
of imaging. Elevational resolution is equivalent to slice thickness on cross-
sectional imaging.
Elevational resolution is approximately equivalent to lateral resolution and also
varies with depth.
Near field and far field
The near field determines the maximum depth that can be imaged. It is not
related to image quality at increasing depths.
r2
near field =
A
r= radius of transducer: If r doubles, near field T by 4
A= wavelength: Ifh doubles (T freq), neari field J by 2
The near field (where imaging is possible) is called the Fresnel zone.
The far field (where the ultrasound beam diverges and imaging is impossible) is
called the Frauenhofer zone.
Pulse repetition frequency
Pulse repetition frequency (PRF) is the number of times the transducer outputs
(PRF)
a pulse of sound waves per second. An increase in PRF causes an inversely
proportional decrease in echo listening time. A high PRF therefore limits the
maximum depth of tissue that can be imaged.
PRF = Frame rate X lines per frame.
A typical PRF is "4 kHz 4 0.25 ms (250 usec) between pulses, which allows
imaging of approximately 19.3 cm depth.
Physics: 1218