Gradient recalled echo (GRE) and susseptibility-weighted imaging (SWI)
T2*-weighted GRE sequences are susceptible to signal loss from field inhomogeneities
because there is no 180° rephasing pulse as there is in spin-echo sequences.
SWI is a more sensitive version of GRE involving higher spatial resolution and other features
to reduce artifacts. SWI generates both magnitude and phase images, which can help
distinguish between paramagnetic (blood/iron) and diamagnetic (calcification) substances.
Due to the susceptibility effect, materials like hemosiderin and calcification create blooming
artifacts of signal dropout, which makes even small lesions conspicuous.
The differential diagnosis of multiple dark spots on GRE/SWI reflects causes of
microhemorrhage:
Hypertensive microangiopathy (primarily in the basal ganglia, thalami, cerebellum, and pons).
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (primarily lobar in cortico-subcortical sites, sparing deep structures).
Familial cerebral cavernous malformation syndrome (inherited multiple cavernous malformations).
Radiation-induced cerebral vasculopathy.
Diffuse axonal injury (primarily at gray-white matterj junction and corpus callosum).
Hemorrhagic metastases.
Fat embolism.
Complication of cardiac surgery (presumed to be rapidly developed microbleeds).
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
Proton MR spectroscopy describes the chemical composition of a brain region. The changes
in brain metabolites can be used for diagnostic, prognostic, and treatment assessment of a
variety of CNS disorders.
There are various methods of performing MR spectroscopy. Single-voxel spectroscopy
(SVS) provides a high signal-to-noise ratio with a short scan time but only provides single-
voxel coverage. Multi-voxel chemical shift imaging (CSI) is advantageous for larger or
more heterogeneous lesions because it provides a larger coverage area and higher spatial
resolution due to smaller size of individual voxels, with the tradeoff of longer scan time and
lower signal-to-noise ratio.
The peaks of the main compounds analyzed occur in alphabetical order, displayed left to
right on a reversed axis of resonance frequencies expressed in parts per million (ppm).
Choline (3.2 ppm) is a marker of cell membrane turnover that increases in most abnormalities.
Creatine (3.0 ppm) reflects cellular energy stores and is relatively constant between most disease states.
N-acetylaspartate (NAA) (2.0 ppm) is a marker of neuronal viability that decreases in most abnormalities.
Lipids and lactate (1.3 ppm) reflect abnormal tissue damage and anaerobic glycolysis, respectively. Lipids
have a broad peak and lactate has a doublet peak (due to. J-coupling)- These may be difficult to distinguish,
but the lactate doublet is inverted at intermediate TE (e.g., 144 ms).
Hunter's angle is a quick way to see if a spectrum is normal: a line connecting the tallest
normal peaks (choline, creatine, and NAA) should point up like a plane taking off. Most
diseases feature decreased NAA and/or increased choline, disrupting Hunter's angle.
MRS can help in the evaluation of brain tumors. Prominent lipid/lactate peaks are associated
with high-grade gliomas (when nonenhancing) or lymphoma (when enhancing). Elevated
choline suggests tumor rather than edema (in an area of nonenhancing FLAIR abnormality)
or radiation-induced necrosis (in a contrast-ennancing area; i.e., progression rather than
pseudoprogression), Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-mutant status in gliomas, which carries
favorable prognosis, may be predicted by the presence of 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), but
advanced MRS techniques are required to detect this metabolite.
Neuro Brain: 659