Lacrimal apparatus
The lacrimal apparatus consists of a secretory system and an excretory system.
The lacrimal gland, lodged in the superotemporal angle of the orbit, consists of a palpebral
lobe and an orbital lobe (which is deeper and larger).
Tears drain via the lacrimal canaliculi near the medial canthus into the lacrimal sac, lodged
in the lacrimal fossa at the inferomedial preseptal orbit.
The lacrimal sac empties via the nasolacrimal duct into the nasal inferior meatus.
Orbital muscles
Six extraocular muscles move the eye: four recti (superior, inferior, medial, lateral) and two
oblique (superior and inferior).
The rectus muscles arise from the annulus of Zinn.
The superior oblique muscle arises just superomedial to the annulus of Zinn. The tendon is
reflected at the trochlea, a fibrocartilaginous structure attached to the superior nasal aspect
of the frontal bone.
The inferior oblique muscle arises from the medial corner of the orbital floor.
The levator palpebrae superioris runs with the superior rectus in a muscle complex. The
levator muscle (innervated by CN III) and Muller's (superior tarsal) muscle (innervated by
sympathetics) lift the upper eyelid.
Globe
The globe has three layers: sclera, uvea, and retina.
The sclera is continuous anteriorly with the cornea.
The uvea is composed of the choroid, ciliary body, and iris.
The retina forms most of the inner surface, extending from the optic disc posteriorly to the
ora serrata anteriorly.
The lens separates the anterior and posterior segments of the globe.
The iris separates the anterior and posterior chambers of the anterior segment, which
communicate via the pupil.
The anterior segment is filled with aqueous humor, while the posterior segment is filled with
vitreous humor.
Optic nerve
Although named CN II, the optic nerve is a part of the central nervous system: it is
surrounded by meninges, CSF, and myelin from oligodendroglia (rather than Schwann cells).
The optic nerve is divided into 4 segments: intraocular (optic disc/papilla/nerve head),
intraorbital (the longest part), intracanalicular (within the optic canal), and intracranial
(within the middle cranial fossa).
The two optic nerves converge at the optic chiasm in the suprasellar region.
Neuro Head & Neck: 769