MYELINATION AND CORTICAL DEVELOPMENT
Pattern of myelination
A full-term newborn will have myelination seen in several structures at birth, including:
Posterior limb of internal capsules, middle cerebellar peduncle, ventrolateral thalami, dorsal
brainstem, and the perirolandic regions.
Myelination is most apparent at birth on T1-weighted images. On T1-weighted images
myelin is bright; on T2-weighted images myelin is dark.
Myelination generally assumes a mature pattern by age two, although the frontal lobes
continue to myelinate through adolescence.
Overview of cortical development
Primitive brain forms around the primordial ventricular system, which is lined by pluripotent
stem cells called germinal matrix cells.
Development of normal cortex is dependent on both germinal matrix cell migration and
subsequent organization into the normal 6-layered lamination of the cortex.
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS
Polymicrogyria
Polymicrogyria is a malformation of
cortical development characterized
by a derangement of the normal 6-
layered organization of the cortex,
which leads to too many gyri and too
few sulci.
Polymicrogyria is thought to be
caused by disturbance either late in
neuronal migration or early in cortical
lamellar organization.
Polymicrogyria may be caused
by in-utero infection (especially
CMV), in-utero ischemia, or genetic
causes. In many cases, no cause
is found. Clinical manifestations
include developmental delay, focal
neurological signs and symptoms,
quadriparesis, or epilepsy.
On MR imaging, the cortex appears
thick with an irregularly bumpy
surface and high-resolution imaging
can resolve multiple small individual
gyri. The polymicrogyric cortex looks T2-weighted MRI demonstrates bilateral perisylvian and
thin and bumpy in unmyelinated
bifrontal polymicrogyria (arrows point to the perisylvian
regions, and thicker and smoother in polymicrogyria). The junction between affected cortex and
myelinated areas of the brain.
the white matter has an irregular bumpy outline in this young
patient with predominantly unmyelinated white matter.
Bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria is
the most common distribution.
Peds: 1184