Disc bulge and herniation protrusion and extrusion)
A disc herniation is a focal displacement of disc material, occurring when the substance
of the disc (nucleus pulposus, annulus fibrosus, or both) extends beyond the disc's normal
margins. A disc herniation should encompass less than 90° of the disc circumference.
A disc herniation can be classified as either a protrusion or an extrusion, dependent on the
width of its neck. A protrusion features a neck wider than the dome, while an extrusion
has a dome wider than the neck (similar to a saccular aneurysm). Because protrusion and
extrusion are more specific terms, the term herniation should generally not be used in
radiology reports.
nucleus pulposus
annulus fibrosus
normal disc
disc bulge:
protrusion:
extrusion:
>180° of disc circumference
<90° of disc circumference
<90° of disc circumference
neck is wider than the dome
dome is wider than neck
(analogous to a saccular aneurysm)
note that extrusion may be craniocaudal
both protrusion and extrusion are considered' "herniation"
A disc bulge is defined as disc material extending beyond the edges of the ring apophyses
extending >180° of the disc. There is no need to embellish this consensus terminology with
unnecessary words such as "diffuse disc bulge" or "broad-based disc bulge."
Disc tissue extending beyond the limits of the disc space between 90° and 180° can be
described as an asymmetric disc bulge.
Disc herniations may extend through the a gap in the cartilagenous endplate, causing an
intravertebral herniation, much more commonly referred to as a Schmorl node.
Several terms and variations describe the medial-lateral position of a herniation: Central,
subarticular, foraminal, and extra-foraminal, as illustrated on the following page.
A central herniation is midline. For a lesion that is just lateral to midline, the terms right central or left
central are preferred, although right or left paracentral is also acceptable.
The subarticular zone is located at the lateral recess, in the region of the traversing dorsal and ventral
nerve roots, as they separate from the spinal cord (upper lumbar) or the cauda equina (mid to lower
lumbar).
Spine: 882