Chronic pulmonary embolism
Clinical diagnosis
Chronic PES present with signs and symptoms of pulmonary hypertension, including
shortness of breath exacerbated with activity, fatigue, and chest pressure or pain.
Note that not all patients with chronic PE develop pulmonary hypertension.
Imaging findings
Chronic PES present as eccentric filling defects, a
web, or pruning of the pulmonary artery branches.
Note that resolving acute PE will involute with
eccentric filling defects or webs.
Parenchymal signs include mosaic attenuation from
altered perfusion and occasionally scarring.
In these patients, it is important to look for signs of
pulmonary hypertension which include:
Enlargement of the pulmonary artery when the PA to
Axial CT demonstrates a subsegmental
ascending aorta ratio is 21.
eccentric web, consistent with a chronic
Right ventricular enlargement and hypertrophy.
pulmonary embolism.
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH)
CTEPH is the constellation of chronic PE and pulmonary HTN (subsequently discussed).
Patients are often evaluated with V/Q scan and CT PE since each can miss defects.
CT shows eccentric organized thrombi, pulmonary artery enlargement, mosaic attenuation
and vascular pruning. V/Q scan shows segmental perfusion defects.
Contrast-enhanced CT axial images demonstrate extensive eccentric mural thrombi involving the distal right
main pulmonary artery with foci of calcification (blue arrow). Lung-windows demonstrate enlarged pulmonary
arterial trunk (red arrow) and mosaic attenuation of the lung parenchyma (green arrow).
Pitfalls of CT pulmonary angiogram
Hilar lymph nodes and mucus-impacted bronchi may simulate PE.
Unopacified pulmonary veins may simulate PE on a single CT slice; however, one may
distinguish between a pulmonary artery and vein by tracing the vessel back to the heart.
During the Valsalva maneuver, transient disruption of contrast bolus occurs when
unopacified blood from the IVC enters the right atrium and is pumped into the lungs. This
causes dense contrast to be seen in the SVC, no contrast in the pulmonary artery, and
dense contrast in the aorta. On the other hand, late contrast timing would show less dense
contrast in the SVC. This can be mitigated by a scan in expiration.
Cardiac and respiratory motion artifacts can decrease image quality.
Cardiac motion causes blurring of the left lower lobe pulmonary arteries, which may simulate small
emboli. Respiratory motion decreases accuracy in evaluation of small pulmonary arteries.
Chest: 49