Gout
Gout is a crystal-induced inflammatory
arthropathy caused by sodium urate
deposition in the joints. Excess uric acid
may be secondary to under-excretion
(more common, typically caused by renal
insufficiency) or overproduction (much more
rare, typically seen in younger patients).
It takes about 10-20 years of hyperuricemia
before the clinical syndrome of gout develops.
Microscopically, gout crystals are negatively
birefringent needle-like crystals within neutrophils.
The great toe is most commonly involved, but
gout can occur in any joint.
-
Radiographic hallmarks are sharply
marginated erosions with overhanging
margins.
Joint spaces are typically well preserved
AP radiograph of the foot shows soft-tissue swelling
until late in the disease. Similarly, bony
surrounding the second MTP. An erosion of the
mineralization is preserved until the late
head of the second metacarpal head features a
phases.
characteristic overhanging margin (arrow).
Ultrasound of gout shows a double contour sign representing an irregular hyperechoic line
of urate crystals deposited on the hyperechoic cartilage.
MRI is not a primary modality for evaluation of gout, but erosions and variable signal
intensity intra-articular and periarticular gouty tophi are well seen.
Tophaceous gout refers to deposition of urate crystals, inflammatory cells, and foreign body
giant cells in the soft tissues. Gouty tophi may occur anywhere in the body, including within
the joint and periarticular locations such as tendons, ligaments, and bursae. In particular,
gouty tophi have a propensity to develop in the olecranon bursa of the elbow.
Dual-energy CT is an excellent modality to identify monosodium urate crystals, which are
typically colored green in post-processing. By altering the post-processing parameters, green
color coding can also be used to identify CPP crystals.
Coronal CT
Post-processed dual-energy CT Volume-rendered dual-energy CT
Gouty arthropathy of the ankle: Coronal CT shows erosions of the medial talus and medial malleolus
(yellow arrows) and amorphous mineralization (red arrow) in the deltoid ligament. Color-coded post-
processed dual-energy CT shows that the deltoid mineralization is colored green (red arrows) on the gout
algorithm, consistent with monosodium urate deposition. There was no green color-coding on the CPP
algorithm (not shown).
MSK: 925