Liver ultrasound
Ultrasound of the liver is often used to evaluate patients with abnormal LFTS, as it can
identify biliary pathology and diffuse parenchymal processes. Ultrasound is commonly
used as a screening tool for HCC in high-risk patients given its relatively low cost and lack
of ionizing radiation. Characterization of hepatic masses, however, requires further workup
with cross-sectional imaging.
Hepatic Doppler ultrasound is a valuable tool for determining abnormal blood flow to,
within, or from the liver and can also be utilized to evaluate transplants and TIPS.
DIFFUSE PARENCHYMAL LIVER DISEASE
Hepatic steatosis
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease can be divided into steatosis and steatosis with associated
inflammatory activity steatohepatitis). Overall, greater than 25% of the population
is afflicted with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and approximately 5% have
steatohepatitis. Ultimately, steatohepatitis may progress to cirrhosis.
Common patterns of hepatic steatosis include diffuse, focal (commonly seen in the
gallbladder fossa and periportal spaces), geographic, and nodular.
Ultrasound shows a diffuse increase in hepatic echogenicity relative to the right kidney.
Normally, the liver and kidney should have the same echogenicity. Hepatic steatosis also
causes increased sound attenuation, leading to poor visualization of deeper structures.
Normal liver: Ultrasound of the liver and kidney
Hepatic steatosis: Ultrasound in a different patient
shows the normal isoechoic appearance of liver
shows diffusely increased echogenicity of the liver
relative to renal cortex.
when compared to the renal cortex.
CT shows decreased attenuation relative to the spleen.
On unenhanced CT, the liver should be slightly hyperattenuating relative to the spleen. The traditional
teaching is that steatosis is present if the liver attenuates at least 10 Hounsfield units (HU) less than the
spleen, although new work suggests that even a single HU of relative hypoattenuation compared to the
spleen may represent hepatic steatosis.
On contrast-enhanced CT, evaluation of hepatic steatosis is less reliable compared to unenhanced CT due
to different contrast uptake rates of the liver and the spleen. However, the liver is considered diffusely
hypoattenuating if it attenuates at least 25 HU less than the spleen in the portal venous phase.
MRI can determine if steatosis is present and can provide a rough gauge as to its severity.
In- and out-of-phase MRI imaging can more accurately quantify the degree of steatosis,
although liver biopsy is the gold standard and best evaluates for the presence of
steatohepatitis and early fibrotic change.
G!: 99