LARYNX
Overview and anatomy
epiglottis
aryepiglottic fold
piriform sinus
posterior to aryepiglottic folds
false vocal cords
laryngeal
vestibule
paraglottic fat
supraglottic
larynx
hyoid bone
thyroid cartilage
laryngeal ventricle
glottis
thyroarytenoid
and vocalis muscles
subglottic
true
vocal ligament
larynx
vocal cords
cricoid cartilage
trachea
trachea
The larynx connects the oropharynx airway to the tracheal airway.
The cartilaginous components of the larynx include the epiglottis, thyroid cartilage, cricoid
cartilage, and arytenoids.
The cricoid cartilage is a complete ring which provides the foundation for the laryngeal skeleton.
The entire larynx, including the epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds and false vocal cords, is lined
with mucosa.
The aryepiglottic folds are an extension of the mucosa covering the epiglottis and mark the entrance to
the larynx. The aryepiglottic folds connect the epiglottis anteriorly to the arytenoids posteriorly.
The false vocal folds are mucosal infoldings superior to the laryngeal ventricle. They can be identified on
cross-sectional imaging by the presence of the paraglottic fat laterally.
The supraglottic larynx extends from the epiglottis to the ventricle. The false vocal cords,
the aryepiglottic folds, the suprahyoid epiglottis, infrahyoid epiglottis, and the arytenoid
cartilages are within the supraglottis and considered subsites for the purposes of staging SCC
as discussed below.
The glottis includes the true vocal cords, the anterior and posterior commissures, and
extends 1 cm below the vocal cords. The thyroarytenoid muscle, vocalis muscle, and the
innermost vocal ligament form the bulk of the vocal cords.
The true vocal cords are identified in the axial plane by CT or MRI by identifying the transition of
paraglottic fat to muscle (thyroarytenoid muscle) within the wall of the larynx.
The subglottic larynx begins 1 cm inferior to the apex of the laryngeal ventricles and extends
to the first tracheal ring. The cricoid cartilaginous ring is within the subglottic larynx.
Neuro Head & Neck: 842