Hyperparathyroidism Recklinghausen disease of bone)
yperparathyroidism: Radiograph of the hand (left image) shows subperiosteal resorption and scalloping of
the radial margins of the second and third proximal and middle phalanges (arrows). Lateral skull radiograph in
a different patient shows the classic sat-and-pepper appearance due to trabecular resorption.
Cases courtesy Stacy. Smith, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Hyperparathyroidism is excess parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH is normally secreted in
response to hypocalcemia and maintains serum calcium levels by stimulating osteoclasts.
Primary yperparathyroidism is autonomously increased secretion from an overactive
parathyroid gland, typically due to a parathyroid adenoma. Serum calcium is high and
phosphate is low.
Secondary hyperparatlyroidism is increased secretion of PTH by a normal gland in response
to hypocalcemia secondary to renal failure. Serum calcium is usually normal.
Tertiary yperparatiyroidism is seen after prolonged secondary yperparathyroidism, where
the parathyroid glands escape regulatory control and oversecrete PTH.
The radiological hallmarks of ryperparatiyroidism are diffuse bony demineralization and
subperiosteal and subligamentous bone resorption.
Skull: The classic salt-and-pepper skull is due to trabecular resorption.
Hands: Subperiosteal resorption of the radial aspects of the second and third middle phalanges is specific
for yperparathyroidism.
Clavicle: Subperiosteal resorption of the clavicle tends to affect the acromial (distal) aspect.
Knee: Subperiosteal bone resorption of the medial proximal tibial metaphysis.
Teeth: Loss of lamina dura surrounding the tooth socket can occasionally be seen.
Anywhere: Brown tumors are more common in primary yperparathyroidism.
Everywhere: Diffuse osteopenia results from continued osteoclast activation.
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition (CPPD) may occur, which is more common in
primary typerparathyroidism.
Soft-tissue calcification, periosteal reaction, and sclerosis are seen more commonly in
secondary yperparathyroidism.
Complications of ryperparathyroidism include insufficiency fracture and increased
propensity for ligaments and tendons to rupture.
MSK: 983