Dermoid cyst (mature cystic teratoma; continued)
Both endometriomas and teratomas are predominantly hyperintense on T1-weighted
images due to their blood and fat content, respectively. Distinction can be made by using
the fat-suppressed imaging sequences. Teratoma will show signal loss on the fat-suppressed
images, due to internal macroscopic fat, while an endometrioma will not.
Dermoid causing ovarian torsion:
Axial contrast-enhanced CT demonstrates
abnormal location of the right ovary which is
displaced to the left adnexa. The lead-point
is a right ovarian mass (arrows) containing
fat, soft tissue, and calcification.
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer is the tenth most common female malignancy, but ranks fifth in cancer
deaths among women as it often presents at a late stage.
Ovarian cancer may be epithelial, germ cell, sex cord-stromal, or metastatic in origin.
Approximately 90% of malignant tumors are of epithelial origin. Serous tumors are the most
common epithelial subtype, followed by mucinous, endometrioid, and clear cell.
Serous ystadenocarcinomas are frequently bilateral and typically appear as mixed solid and cystic
masses. The solid portions demonstrate avid enhancement. There is often concomitant ascites.
Mucinous ystadenocarcinomas are large, most commonly unilateral, and occur in older patients
compared to serous ystadenocardinomas. Mucinous ystadenocarcinoma typically presents as a
multiloculated cystic mass containing mucin-rich T1 hyperintense fluid.
Clear cell carcinoma and less commonly endometrioid carcinoma are associated with endometriosis.
Malignant germ cell tumors occur in younger patients and include dysgerminoma,
endodermal sinus tumor, and immature teratoma.
Metastases to the ovary are uncommon but may result from gastric cancer, colon cancer,
pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, and melanoma. Metastases are often bilateral.
A Krukenberg tumori is an ovarian metastasis of a mucin-producing tumor, typically gastric or colonic
adenocarcinoma.
Endometrial cancer may also metastasize to the ovaries.
Ultrasound findings suggestive of a malignant ovarian mass include:
Mural nodule.
High flow on color Doppler.
Thick or irregular walls or septae.
Presence of ascites.
Solid components.
Papillary projections.
MRI is used to characterize indeterminate adnexal masses, rather than for staging.
Features suggesting malignancy include a large size (>10 cm), solid enhancing component(s),
internal necrosis, ascites, or peritoneal nodularity, although no finding is 100% specific.
Staging of ovarian carcinoma is based on the FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology
and Obstetrics) system. It characterizes extent of disease based on involvement of the
ovaries (one or two), fallopian tubes, uterus, pelvic intraperitoneal tissues, retroperitoneal
lymph nodes, malignant cells in peritoneal washings, and/or peritoneal or distant
metastasis.
GU: 320