MISCELLANEOUS UTERINE DISEASE
Uterine arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
Uterine arteriovenous malformation is caused by abnormal communication between the uterine
arterial branches and draining myometrial venous plexus. It may be congenital (very rare) or
acquired post-traumatic, infection, or iatrogenic, such as post dilation and curettage (D&C)).
Grayscale and color Doppler can show an enlarged, heterogeneous, and multicystic-
appearing uterus. The appearance is similar to gestational trophoblastic disease (discussed
in the first trimester of pregnancy section), but with negative B-hCG.
INTERVENTION/POST-SURGICAL CHANGE
Intrauterine device (IUD)
3D ultrasound: shows normal
Malpositioned and malrotated IUD Right arm of the IUD is embedded
position of IUD within the
(arrows) within the lower uterine within the myometrium (arrows).
endometrial cavity.
segment/cervix.
The ultrasound appearance of an intrauterine device (IUD) is dependent on the type of IUD:
Hormonal plastic IUD (delivers progesterone): Shadowing structure in endometrial canal.
Copper IUD: Highly echogenic.
Complications of IUD are overall rare and include:
Malpositioning.
Infection: Increased risk of infection with prolonged IUD use, especially actinomycosis.
Ectopic pregnancy: When pregnancy occurs in the presence of an IUD, there is increased risk for ectopic
pregnancy.
Uterine perforation (extremely rare).
Post-Caesarean section complications
Bladder-flap hematoma is a rare complication of a low-transverse Caesarean section, where
a postsurgical hematoma forms in the vesicouterine space (between the posterior bladder
and the anterior uterus).
Ultrasound of a bladder-flap hematoma will show a complex mass posterior to the bladder.
Subfascial hematoma is also a rare complication of Caesarean section due to extraperitoneal
hemorrhage within the prevesical space (anterior to the bladder).
Ultrasound shows a complex mass anterior to the bladder.
Iti is important to distinguish a subfascial hematoma from a bladder-flap hematoma, as the
surgical approach for repair is different.
GU: 311