CIRCLE OF WILLIS
A2 segment of anterior cerebral artery (ACA)
anterior communicating
recurrent artery of Heubner (arises from A1)
artery (A-comm)
A1 segment of anterior cerebral artery (ACA)
medial lenticulostriates
lateral lenticulostriates (off of MCA)
(off of ACA)
ophthalmic
middle cerebral artery (MCA)
ICA
anterior choroidal (most distal branch off ICA
perforators
before terminall bifurcation into ACA and MCA)
(along entire COW)
posterior communicating artery (P-comm)
P2 segment of posterior cerebral artery (PCA)
P1 segment of posterior cerebral artery (PCA)
superior cerebellar artery (SCA; comes off distal basilar)
ICA =i internal carotid artery
ACA = anterior cerebral artery
basilar artery
AICA = anteriori inferior cerebellar artery
PICA: = posterior inferior cerebellar artery
AICA (comes off proximal basilar)
PICA (comes off vertebral)
anterior
vertebral artery
spinal artery
Critical small arteries arising from the circle of Willis
The A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) travels above the optic nerves and
gives off the recurrent artery of Heubner, which supplies the caudate head and anterior
limb of the internal capsule. The A1 segment also gives rise to the medial lenticulostriate
perforator vessels which supply the medial basal ganglia.
Just outside the circle of Willis, the middle cerebral artery (MCA) gives rise to the lateral
lenticulostriate perforator vessels to supply the lateral basal ganglia including the lateral
putamen, external capsule, and the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
The posterior communicating artery (P-comm) travels between optic tract and cranial nerve
III, giving off anterior thalamoperforator vessels. A P-comm aneurysm may cause cranial
nerve III palsy due to local mass effect.
The posterior cerebral artery (PCA) gives off thalamoperforators to supply the thalamus.
Artery of Percheron is a variant where there is a dominant thalamic perforator supplying the
ventromedial thalami bilaterally and the rostral midbrain, arising from a P1 PCA segment. An
artery of Percheron infarct will result in bilateral ventromedial thalamic infarction, with or
without midbrain infarction (the infarct may be V shaped if the midbrain is involved). Deep
venous thrombosis may also result in bilateral thalamic infarcts.
The anterior choroidal artery is the most distal branch of the internal carotid artery. As
discussed on the previous page, it supplies the optic chiasm, hippocampus, and posterior
limb of the internal capsule.
Neuro Brain: 667