ORBITAL INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Idiopathic orbital inflammation (pseudotumor)
Idiopathic orbital inflammation, originally known as orbital pseudotumor, refers to an orbital
mass or structure enlargement related to a nonspecific inflammatory infiltrate of unknown
cause. It is diagnosed after excluding systemic autoinflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic
etiologies.
Idiopathic orbital inflammation is the most common cause of a painful orbital mass in
adults. Pain helps distinguish this entity from mimics (e.g., lymphoma, thyroid eye disease).
Most cases are unilateral and acute or subacute in onset.
The main anatomic subtypes and their imaging findings are:
Idiopathic dacryoadenitis: diffuse lacrimal gland enlargement and enhancement.
Idiopathic orbital fat inflammation: fat stranding and/or ill-defined soft tissue involving several
structures.
Idiopathic orbital myositis: smooth enlargement of one or several extraocular muscles; most commonly
affects the lateral rectus muscle and also involves the anterior tendon (unlike thyroid eye disease).
Less common subtypes and their imaging findings include:
Optic perineuritis: optic nerve sheath thickening and enhancement.
Tolosa-Hunt syndrome: cavernous sinus thickening and enhancement.
IgG4-related ophthalmic disease
Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related disease is a multisystem nbro-intammatory disorder. The
diagnosis requires histopathology or serology demonstrating IgG4 expression.
The orbit is the most frequently involved site in the head and neck. In turn, the most
common site of IgG4-related ophthalmic disease is the lacrimal gland. Similar to idiopathic
orbital inflammation, other common sites of involvement include the extraocular muscles
and orbital fat.
A distinguishing feature in some cases of IgG4-related ophthalmic disease is infiltration/
enlargement of the infraorbital nerve.
The combination of lacrimal and major salivary gland involvement (parotid or
submandibular) was previously called Mikulicz syndrome, and now termed IgG4-related
chronic sclerosing dacryoadenitis and sialadenitis.
Granulomatous diseases
Granulomatous inflammation in the orbit appears similar radiologically to idiopathic/
nonspecific inflammation but may be associated with a systemic disorder such as sarcoidosis
or granulomatosis with polyangiitis. These more commonly affect the globe (e.g., uveitis,
scleritis, conjunctivitis), but involvement of the extraocular orbit is better seen on imaging.
Sarcoidosis of the extraocular orbit most often involves the lacrimal gland, but it may
also affect the optic nerve sheath, extraocular muscles, or orbital fat. Concurrent thoracic
manifestations of sarcoidosis point towards the diagnosis.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis can involve the orbit, with an infiltrative mass in the
orbital fat being the most common type, followed by dacryoadenitis and then extraocular
myositis, usually contiguous with sinonasal disease.
Neuro Head & Neck: 772