Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a rare tumor that originates from tiny salivary glands lining
the tracheobronchial tree.
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma tends to affect younger patients than adenoid cystic carcinoma.
CT appearance is a round or oval endobronchial mass, indistinguishable from carcinoid.
Tracheal lymphoma
Tracheal lymphoma is rare. It is usually associated with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT), a low-grade malignancy.
Endobronchial metastasis
Spin:
Endobronchial metastasis:
Coronal contrast-enhanced CT
demonstrates a heterogeneously
enhancing mass, which invades the
right mainstem bronchus (arrows). This
was a spindle-cell carcinoma, but the
imaging appearance is nonspecific.
Breast cancer, renal cell carcinoma, thyroid cancer, lung cancer, melanoma, and sarcoma are
the most common malignancies to metastasize to the central airways.
The mnemonic BReTh Lung may be helpful to remember the four most common airway
metastases (breast, renal cell, thyroid, and lung).
Direct invasion of the central airways by adjacent malignancy
Direct central airway invasion occurs more commonly than endobronchial metastases.
Aggressive laryngeal, thyroid, esophageal, and lung cancer may cause direct airway invasion.
Benign endobronchial lesions
Papilloma is a benign but potentially pre-malignant lesion that may transform into
carcinoma. Suspected papillomas are typically closely followed.
A single papilloma is usually caused by chronic irritation.
Multiple papillomas (laryngotracheal papillomatosis) is caused by HPV, which may be acquired at birth.
Distribution is usually centered in the larynx, with tracheobronchial involvement in 1-5% of cases.
Papillomas may spread to the lungs, where they will form multiple cavitary nodules with dependent
distribution.
Chondroma is a benign cartilaginous tumor that rarely may occur in the airways.
Other benign endobronchial lesions include schwannoma, adenoma, hamartoma,
hemangioma, lipoma, and leiomyoma.
Chest: 89