BONE TUMORS
GENERAL APPROACH TO BONE TUMORS
Global approach to bone lesions
Very common in clinical practice!
Idon't know what it is
Differential depends on age:
. Adult: Mets/myeloma
. Child/teenager: Ewing/infection
Aggressive appearance
Aggressive but non-specific imaging features
. Indistinct margins
Wide zone of transition
Very rare in clinical practice!
Aggressive periosteal
I know what it is!
May be tested on boards.
reaction
Osteosarcoma
Permeative appearance
Chondrosarcoma
Soft tissue component
Lesion with (sometimes)
. Endosteal scalloping
characteristic. imaging features
Very common in clinical practice!
Idon't know what it is
Won't be tested on boards.
Cans say "fibro-osseous) lesion"tos soundl like a
muxulosketetalodologst.
Nonaggressive appearance
Non-aggressive but non-specific imaging features
. Sclerotic margins
. Enchondroma
. Narrow zone of transition- Osteoid osteoma
. Well circumscribed
Iknow what it is!
No endosteal scalloping,
Osteochondroma
aggressive periosteal
Non-ossifying fibroma
Lesion with characteristic imaging features
. Hemangioma
reaction, or soft tissue
Giant cell tumor
component
Fibrous dysplasia
Bone tumors can be an intimidating topic because there are SO many different types of
tumors with similar-sounding names.
When faced with a bone lesion, it can be helpful to think of bone tumors in 4 groups, as
shown above.
Lesions may have aggressive or nonaggressive imaging appearances. Indistinct margins,
aggressive periosteal reaction (as illustrated on the following page), wide zone of transition,
permeative appearance, soft tissue component, and endosteal scalloping are aggressive
imaging features. Any one of these features may be enough to be concerning.
Additionally, some bone lesions can have characteristic imaging features to allow you to
arrive at a specific diagnosis (perhaps more on tests than in real life). These are the lesions
that should be learned (listed on the right side in the diagram above) and include both
benign and malignant etiologies.
In clinical practice, it is far more common for bone lesions to not have specific imaging
features, and management should be determined based on aggressive versus nonaggressive
appearance.
MSK: 934