Malignant: Lymphoma
Primary bone lymphoma is very rare and tends to occur in adults over 40.
Bone lymphoma appears as an aggressive lytic lesion, but may also be an important
differential consideration for an ivory (diffusely sclerotic) vertebral body.
Lymphoma is often associated with an adjacent soft-tissue mass.
FAT (LIPO-) LESIONS
Benign: Intraosseous lipoma
Lateral radiograph of the ankle shows a
nonspecific circumscribed lucent lesion in
the calcaneus (arrows) with a thin rim of
peripheral sclerosis.
The differential for this lesion would
include intraosseous lipoma, simple bone
cyst, or aneurysmal bone cyst.
If central or ring-like calcification were
present, that would more strongly favor
intraosseous lipoma.
Intraosseous lipoma is an uncommon benign neoplasm. The most common sites are the
calcaneus, subtrochanteric region of the femur, distal tibia/fibula, and metatarsals. Imaging
can be variable depending on the degree of fat, calcification, fibrous tissue, and peripheral
sclerosis. Central or ring-like calcification is often present.
NOTOCHORDAL LESIONS
Malignant: Chordoma
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression Post-contrast axial T1-weighted MRI with fat suppression
Sacral chordoma: There is a lobulated, T2 hyperintense mass (yellow arrows) arising from the sacrum, with
destruction of the coccyx. The mass is predominantly midline, extending into the right perineal and pararectal
soft tissues. The mass is largely hypovascular (red arrows), with septational enhancement anteriorly (blue
arrows).
Chordoma is a malignant lesion deriving from a notochord remnant. It arises in the midline
of the axial skeleton, either in the spheno-occipital region, body of C2 (less commonly other
vertebral bodies), or sacrococcygeal location.
Chordoma is a destructive lytic lesion with irregular scalloped borders.
Calcifications may be present, which are due to necrosis, not bone formation. On MRI,
chordomas have lobulated T2 hyperintense signal with heterogeneous enhancement.
MSK: 957