Page kidney
A Page kidney (named after the doctor who performed experiments wrapping animal
kidneys with cellophane) is a rare cause of secondary hypertension due to extrinsic
compression of the kidney by a subcapsular collection hematoma/urinoma, usually
following trauma.
A subscapular hematoma compresses the renal parenchyma and decreases its blood flow.
Altered hemodynamics induce increased renin secretion, which can lead to hypertension. It
usually takes several months for hypertension to develop.
Imaging shows a subcapsular hematoma causing deformation and flattening of the kidney.
Percutaneous drainage of the hematoma may be effective treatment.
H'DRONEPHROSIS, URINARY OBSTRUCTION, AND STONES
Common causes of hydronephrosis
Obstructive (more common):
Non-obstructive:
Obstructing calculus is the most common cause.
Vesicoureteral reflux: congenital or acquired
Ureteral or bladder malignancy.
(post-procedural or post-treatment).
External compression of the ureter by a mass or
Pregnancy (usually right > left).
retroperitoneal fibrosis.
Stones
Nephro/ureterolithasis is a common problem that presents with renal colic. Hematuria is
usually present, but may be absent if the stone is completely obstructing.
Calcium-containing stones (calcium oxalate plus phosphate, pure calcium oxalate, or pure
calcium phosphate) represent 73% of urinary stones.
Urinary stones can also be comprised of uric acid, xanthine, matrix (mucin), pure struvite,
and indinavir (seen in HIV patients on antiretroviral therapy).
Radiographic evaluation of stones
Calcium-stones are radiopaque.
Stones comprised of uric acid, xanthine, matrix, pure struvite, or indinavir are radiolucent.
CT evaluation of stones
Most stones are radiopaque on CT, except for indinavir and matrix stones (rare).
Indinavir stone: Transverse grayscale ultrasound of the bladder shows a 4 mm non-shadowing stone (calipers
on left image) at the right ureterovesicular, junction (UVI). There is upstream mild right ydroureteronepnross
and urothelial thickening (right image; arrows). No radiopaque stone was seen on CT performed two days prior
to this ultrasound (CT not shown).
GU: 250