COMPLICATIONS OF PNEUMONIA
Pulmonary abscess
Pulmonary abscess is necrosis of the lung parenchyma typically due to Staphylococcus
aureus, Pseudomonas, or anaerobic bacteria.
An air-fluid level is often present.
An abscess is usually spherical, with equal dimensions on frontal and lateral views.
Empyema
Empyema is infection within the pleural space.
There are three stages in the development of an empyema:
1) Free-flowing exudative effusion: Can be treated with needle aspiration or simple drain.
2) Development of fibrous strands: Requires large-bore chest tube and fibrinolytic therapy.
3) Fluid becomes solid and jelly-like: Usually requires surgery.
Although pneumonia is often associated with a parapneumonic effusion, most pleural
effusions associated with pneumonia are not empyema, but are instead a sterile effusion
caused by increased capillary permeability.
An empyema conforms to the shape of the pleural space, causing a longer air-fluid level on
the lateral radiograph. This is in contrast to an abscess, discussed above, which typically is
spherical and has the same dimensions on the frontal and lateral radiographs.
The split pleura sign describes enhancing parietal and visceral pleura of an empyema seen
on contrast-enhanced study.
Split pleura sign: Contrast-enhanced CT shows
enhancement of thei thickened visceral and
parietal pleural layers (arrows), which encase a
pleural fluid collection.
The split pleura sign is seen in the majority of
exudative effusions, although it is not specific.
Similar findings can be seen in malignant effusion,
mesothelioma, fibrothorax, and after talc
pleurodesis.
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and
Women's Hospital.
Empyema necessitans
Empyema necessitans is extension of an empyema to the chest wall, most commonly
secondary to tuberculosis. Other causative organisms include Actinomyces.
Pneumatocele
A pneumatocele is a thin-walled, gas-filled cyst that may be post-traumatic or develop as a
sequela of pneumonia, typically from Staphylococcus aureus or Pneumocystis.
Bronchopleural fistula (BPF)
Bronchopleura. fistula (BPF) is an abnormal communication between the airway and the
pleural space. It is caused by rupture of the visceral pleura. By far the most common cause
of BPF is surgery; however, other etiologies include lung abscess, empyema, and trauma.
On imaging, new or increasing gas is present in a pleural effusion. A connection between the
bronchial tree and the pleura is not always apparent, but is helpful when seen.
The treatment of BPF is controversial and highly individualized.
Chest: 22