Posterior glenohumeral dislocation
Posterior shoulder dislocation: Grashey (40° oblique; left image) radiograph shows overlap of the humeral
head and the glenoid (arrows); normally, the glenohumeral joint space should be clear on this view.
Posterior displacement of the humerus is confirmed on the transscapular Y view (right image).
Posterior dislocation represents only 2-3% of dislocations and is usually due to severe
muscle spasm, such as from seizure or electrocution. The humeral head is dislocated
posteriorly in these situations since the posterior pulling muscles of the back are generally
stronger than the anterior pushing muscles.
Diagnosis of a posterior dislocation is much more challenging compared to an anterior
dislocation, as the standard frontal radiograph of the shoulder may look close to normal.
Transscapular Y view or axillary view will best show the posterior dislocation.
When possible, diagnosis is usually straightforward on an axillary view; however, many patients with
posterior shoulder dislocation will not be able to abduct the arm.
A Grashey (40° oblique) view in a non-dislocated shoulder normally will show clear space
between the glenoid and the humeral head; however, in case of posterior dislocation there
will be overlap of the medially displaced humeral head with the glenoid.
The lightbulb sign describes the appearance of the humeral head due to the fixed internal
rotation of the arm often seen in posterior dislocation.
The trough sign describes a compression fracture of the anteromedial aspect of the humeral
head, also known as a reverse Hill-Sachs, from impaction of the humeral head on the
posterior glenoid rim upon recoil.
Inferior glenohumeral dislocation luxatio erecta)
Luxatio erecta:
Frontal radiograph shows inferior dislocation of the
humerus with characteristic: superiorly projecting
humerus.
Inferior dislocation, also called luxatio erecta, is rare (occurring in approximately 1% of
dislocations) and is usually caused by direct force to a fully abducted arm.
Inferior dislocation is often associated with rotator cuff tear and greater tuberosity fracture.
Inferior dislocation may cause injury to the axillary nerve or artery.
MSK: 1057